West of Arkham the hills rise wild, and there are valleys with deep woods that no axe
                has ever cut. There are dark narrow glens where the trees slope fantastically, and where thin
                brooklets trickle without ever having caught the glint of sunlight. On the gentler slopes there are farms, ancient and rocky, with squat, moss-coated
                cottages brooding eternally over old New England secrets in the lee of great ledges;
                but these are all vacant now, the wide chimneys crumbling and the shingled sides
                bulging perilously beneath low gambrel roofs.The old folk have gone away, and foreigners do not like to live there. French-Canadians have tried it, Italians have tried it, and the Poles have come and
                departed. It is not because of anything that can be seen or heard or handled, but because of
                something that is imagined. The place is not good for imagination, and does not bring restful dreams at
                night. It must be this which keeps the foreigners away, for old Ammi Pierce has never told
                them of anything he recalls from the strange days. Ammi, whose head has been a little queer for years, is the only one who still
                remains, or who ever talks of the strange days; and he dares to do this because his
                house is so near the open fields and the travelled roads around Arkham.There was once a road over the hills and through the valleys, that ran straight where
                the blasted heath is now; but people ceased to use it and a new road was laid
                curving far toward the south. Traces of the old one can still be found amidst the weeds of a returning wilderness,
                and some of them will doubtless linger even when half the hollows are flooded for
                the new reservoir. Then the dark woods will be cut down and the blasted heath will slumber far below
                blue waters whose surface will mirror the sky and ripple in the sun. And the secrets of the strange days will be one with the deep's secrets; one with
                the hidden lore of old ocean, and all the mystery of primal earth.When I went into the hills and vales to survey for the new reservoir they told me the
                place was evil. They told me this in Arkham, and because that is a very old town full of witch
                legends I thought the evil must be something which grandmas had whispered to
                children through centuries. The name "blasted heath" seemed to me very odd and theatrical, and I
                wondered how it had come into the folklore of a Puritan people. Then I saw that dark westward tangle of glens and slopes for myself, and ceased to
                wonder at anything besides its own elder mystery. It was morning when I saw it, but shadow lurked always there. The trees grew too thickly, and their trunks were too big for any healthy New
                England wood. There was too much silence in the dim alleys between them, and the floor was too
                soft with the dank moss and mattings of infinite years of decay. In the open spaces, mostly along the line of the old road, there were little
                hillside farms; sometimes with all the buildings standing, sometimes with only one
                or two, and sometimes with only a lone chimney or fast-filling cellar. Weeds and briers reigned, and furtive wild things rustled in the undergrowth. Upon everything was a haze of restlessness and oppression; a touch of the unreal and
                the grotesque, as if some vital element of perspective or chiaroscuro were awry. I did not wonder that the foreigners would not stay, for this was no region to sleep
                in. It was too much like a landscape of Salvator Rosa; too much like some forbidden
                woodcut in a tale of terror.But even all this was not so bad as the blasted heath. I knew it the moment I came upon it at the bottom of a spacious valley; for no other
                name could fit such thing, or any other thing fit such a name. It was as if the poet had coined the phrase from having seen this one particular
                region. It must, I thought as I viewed it, be the outcome of a fire; but why had nothing new
                ever grown over those five acres of grey desolation that sprawled open to the sky
                like a great spot eaten by acid in the woods and fields? It lay largely to the north of the ancient road line, but encroached a little on the
                other side. I felt an odd reluctance about approaching, and did so at last only because my
                business took me through and past it. There was no vegetation of any kind on that broad expanse, but only a fine grey dust
                or ash which no wind seemed ever to blow about. The trees near it were sickly and stunted, and many dead trunks stood or lay rotting
                at the rim. As I walked hurriedly by I saw the tumbled bricks and stones of an old chimney and
                cellar on my right, and the yawning black maw of an abandoned well whose stagnant
                vapours played strange tricks with the hues of the sunlight. Even the long, dark woodland climb beyond seemed welcome in contrast, and I
                marvelled no more at the frightened whispers of Arkham people. There had been no house or ruin near; even in the old days the place must have been
                lonely and remote. And at twilight, dreading to repass that ominous spot, I walked circuitously back to
                the town by the curving road on the south. I vaguely wished some clouds would gather, for an odd timidity about the deep skyey
                voids above had crept into my soul.In the evening I asked old people in Arkham about the blasted heath, and what was
                meant by that phrase "strange days" which so many evasively
                muttered. I could not, however, get any good answers, except that all the mystery was much
                more recent than I had dreamed. It was not a matter of old legendry at all, but something within the lifetime of
                those who spoke. It had happened in the 'eighties, and a family had disappeared or was killed. Speakers would not be exact; and because they all told me to pay no attention to old
                Ammi Pierce's crazy tales, I sought him out the next morning, having heard that he
                lived alone in the ancient tottering cottage where the trees first begin to get very
                thick. It was a fearsomely ancient place, and had begun to exude the faint miasmal odour
                which clings about houses that have stood too long. Only with persistent knocking could I rouse the aged man, and when he shuffled
                timidly to the door I could tell he was not glad to see me. He was not so feeble as I had expected; but his eyes drooped in a curious way, and
                his unkempt clothing and white beard made him seem very worn and dismal.Not knowing just how he could best be launched on his tales, I feigned a matter of
                business; told him of my surveying, and asked vague questions about the
                district. He was far brighter and more educated than I had been led to think, and before I
                knew it had grasped quite as much of the subject as any man I had talked with in
                Arkham. He was not like other rustics I had known in the sections where reservoirs were to
                be. From him there were no protests at the miles of old wood and farmland to be blotted
                out, though perhaps there would have been had not his home lain outside the bounds
                of the future lake. Relief was all that he showed; relief at the doom of the dark ancient valleys
                through which he had roamed all his life. They were better under water now--better under water since the strange days. And with this opening his husky voice sank low, while his body leaned forward and
                his right forefinger began to point shakily and impressively.It was then that I heard the story, and as the rambling voice scraped and whispered
                on I shivered again and again despite the summer day. Often I had to recall the speaker from ramblings, piece out scientific points which
                he knew only by a fading parrot memory of professors' talk, or bridge over gaps,
                where his sense of logic and continuity broke down. When he was done I did not wonder that his mind had snapped a trifle, or that the
                folk of Arkham would not speak much of the blasted heath. I hurried back before sunset to my hotel, unwilling to have the stars come out above
                me in the open; and the next day returned to Boston to give up my position. I could not go into that dim chaos of old forest and slope again, or face another
                time that grey blasted heath where the black well yawned deep beside the tumbled
                bricks and stones. The reservoir will soon be built now, and all those elder secrets will lie safe
                forever under watery fathoms. But even then I do not believe I would like to visit that country by night--at least
                not when the sinister stars are out; and nothing could bribe me to drink the new
                city water of Arkham.It all began, old Ammi said, with the meteorite. Before that time there had been no wild legends at all since the witch trials, and
                even then these western woods were not feared half so much as the small island in
                the Miskatonic where the devil held court beside a curious stone altar older than
                the Indians. These were not haunted woods, and their fantastic dusk was never terrible till the
                strange days. Then there had come that white noontide cloud, that string of explosions in the air,
                and that pillar of smoke from the valley far in the wood. And by night all Arkham had heard of the great rock that fell out of the sky and
                bedded itself in the ground beside the well at the Nahum Gardner place. That was the house which had stood where the blasted heath was to come--the trim
                white Nahum Gardner house amidst its fertile gardens and orchards.Nahum had come to town to tell people about the stone, and had dropped in at Ammi
                Pierce's on the way. Ammi was forty then, and all the queer things were fixed very strongly in his
                mind. He and his wife had gone with the three professors from Miskatonic University who
                hastened out the next morning to see the weird visitor from unknown stellar space,
                and had wondered why Nahum had called it so large the day before. It had shrunk, Nahum said as he pointed out the big brownish mound above the ripped
                earth and charred grass near the archaic well-sweep in his front yard; but the wise
                men answered that stones do not shrink. Its heat lingered persistently, and Nahum declared it had glowed faintly in the
                night. The professors tried it with a geologist's hammer and found it was oddly soft. It was, in truth, so soft as to be almost plastic; and they gouged rather than
                chipped a specimen to take back to the college for testing. They took it in an old pail borrowed from Nahum's kitchen, for even the small piece
                refused to grow cool. On the trip back they stopped at Ammi's to rest, and seemed thoughtful when Mrs. Pierce remarked that the fragment was growing smaller and burning the bottom of the
                pail. Truly, it was not large, but perhaps they had taken less than they thought.The day after that--all this was in June of '82--the professors had trooped out again
                in a great excitement. As they passed Ammi's they told him what queer things the specimen had done, and how
                it had faded wholly away when they put it in a glass beaker. The beaker had gone, too, and the wise men talked of the strange stone's affinity
                for silicon. It had acted quite unbelievably in that well-ordered laboratory; doing nothing at
                all and showing no occluded gases when heated on charcoal, being wholly negative in
                the borax bead, and soon proving itself absolutely non-volatile at any producible
                temperature, including that of the oxy-hydrogen blowpipe. On an anvil it appeared highly malleable, and in the dark its luminosity was very
                marked. Stubbornly refusing to grow cool, it soon had the college in a state of real
                excitement; and when upon heating before the spectroscope it displayed shining bands
                unlike any known colours of the normal spectrum there was much breathless talk of
                new elements, bizarre optical properties, and other things which puzzled men of
                science are wont to say when faced by the unknown.Hot as it was, they tested it in a crucible with all the proper reagents. Water did nothing. Hydrochloric acid was the same. Nitric acid and even aqua regia merely hissed and spattered against its torrid
                invulnerability. Ammi had difficulty in recalling all these things, but recognized some solvents as I
                mentioned them in the usual order of use. There were ammonia and caustic soda, alcohol and ether, nauseous carbon disulphide
                and a dozen others; but although the weight grew steadily less as time passed, and
                the fragment seemed to be slightly cooling, there was no change in the solvents to
                show that they had attacked the substance at all. It was a metal, though, beyond a doubt. It was magnetic, for one thing; and after its immersion in the acid solvents there
                seemed to be faint traces of the WidmÃ¤nstÃ¤tten figures found on meteoric iron. When the cooling had grown very considerable, the testing was carried on in glass;
                and it was in a glass beaker that they left all the chips made of the original
                fragment during the work. The next morning both chips and beaker were gone without trace, and only a charred
                spot marked the place on the wooden shelf where they had been.All this the professors told Ammi as they paused at his door, and once more he went
                with them to see the stony messenger from the stars, though this time his wife did
                not accompany him. It had now most certainly shrunk, and even the sober professors could not doubt the
                truth of what they saw. All around the dwindling brown lump near the well was a vacant space, except where
                the earth had caved in; and whereas it had been a good seven feet across the day
                before, it was now scarcely five. It was still hot, and the sages studied its surface curiously as they detached
                another and larger piece with hammer and chisel. They gouged deeply this time, and as they pried away the smaller mass they saw that
                the core of the thing was not quite homogeneous.They had uncovered what seemed to be the side of a large coloured globule embedded in
                the substance. The colour, which resembled some of the bands in the meteor's strange spectrum, was
                almost impossible to describe; and it was only by analogy that they called it colour
                at all. Its texture was glossy, and upon tapping it appeared to promise both brittleness and
                hollowness. One of the professors gave it a smart blow with a hammer, and it burst with a
                nervous little pop. Nothing was emitted, and all trace of the thing vanished with the puncturing. It left behind a hollow spherical space about three inches across, and all thought
                it probable that others would be discovered as the enclosing substance wasted
                away.Conjecture was vain; so after a futile attempt to find additional globules by
                drilling, the seekers left again with their new specimen--which proved, however, as
                baffling in the laboratory as its predecessor. Aside from being almost plastic, having heat, magnetism, and slight luminosity,
                cooling slightly in powerful acids, possessing an unknown spectrum, wasting away in
                air, and attacking silicon compounds with mutual destruction as a result, it
                presented no identifying features whatsoever; and at the end of the tests the
                college scientists were forced to own that they could not place it. It was nothing of this earth, but a piece of the great outside; and as such dowered
                with outside properties and obedient to outside laws.That night there was a thunderstorm, and when the professors went out to Nahum's the
                next day they met with a bitter disappointment. The stone, magnetic as it had been, must have had some peculiar electrical property;
                for it had "drawn the lightning," as Nahum said, with a singular
                persistence. Six times within an hour the farmer saw the lightning strike the furrow in the front
                yard, and when the storm was over nothing remained but a ragged pit by the ancient
                well-sweep, half-chocked with caved-in earth. Digging had borne no fruit, and the scientists verified the fact of the utter
                vanishment. The failure was total; so that nothing was left to do but go back to the laboratory
                and test again the disappearing fragment left carefully cased in lead. That fragment lasted a week, at the end of which nothing of value had been learned
                of it. When it had gone, no residue was left behind, and in time the professors felt
                scarcely sure they had indeed seen with waking eyes that cryptic vestige of the
                fathomless gulfs outside; that lone, weird message from other universes and other
                realms of matter, force, and entity.As was natural, the Arkham papers made much of the incident with its collegiate
                sponsoring, and sent reporters to talk with Nahum Gardner and his family. At least one Boston daily also sent a scribe, and Nahum quickly became a kind of
                local celebrity. He was a lean, genial person of about fifty, living with his wife and three sons on
                the pleasant farmstead in the valley. He and Ammi exchanged visits frequently, as did their wives; and Ammi had nothing
                but praise for him after all these years. He seemed slightly proud of the notice his place had attracted, and talked often of
                the meteorite in the succeeding weeks. That July and August were hot; and Nahum worked hard at his haying in the ten-acre
                pasture across Chapman's Brook; his rattling wain wearing deep ruts in the shadowy
                lanes between. The labour tired him more than it had in other years, and he felt that age was
                beginning to tell on him.Then fell the time of fruit and harvest. The pears and apples slowly ripened, and Nahum vowed that his orchards were
                prospering as never before. The fruit was growing to phenomenal size and unwonted gloss, and in such abundance
                that extra barrels were ordered to handle the future crop. But with the ripening came sore disappointment, for of all that gorgeous array of
                specious lusciousness not one single jot was fit to eat. Into the fine flavour of the pears and apples had crept a stealthy bitterness and
                sickishness, so that even the smallest of bites induced a lasting disgust. It was the same with the melons and tomatoes, and Nahum sadly saw that his entire
                crop was lost. Quick to connect events, he declared that the meteorite had poisoned the soil, and
                thanked Heaven that most of the other crops were in the upland lot along the
                road.Winter came early, and was very cold. Ammi saw Nahum less often than usual, and observed that he had begun to look
                worried. The rest of his family too, seemed to have grown taciturn; and were far from steady
                in their churchgoing or their attendance at the various social events of the
                countryside. For this reserve or melancholy no cause could be found, though all the household
                confessed now and then to poorer health and a feeling of vague disquiet. Nahum himself gave the most definite statement of anyone when he said he was
                disturbed about certain footprints in the snow. They were the usual winter prints of red squirrels, white rabbits, and foxes, but
                the brooding farmer professed to see something not quite right about their nature
                and arrangement. He was never specific, but appeared to think that they were not as characteristic of
                the anatomy and habits of squirrels and rabbits and foxes as they ought to be. Ammi listened without interest to this talk until one night when he drove past
                Nahum's house in his sleigh on the way back from Clark's Corners. There had been a moon, and a rabbit had run across the road; and the leaps of that
                rabbit were longer than either Ammi or his horse liked. The latter, indeed, had almost run away when brought up by a firm rein. Thereafter Ammi gave Nahum's tales more respect, and wondered why the Gardner dogs
                seemed so cowed and quivering every morning. They had, it developed, nearly lost the spirit to bark.In February the McGregor boys from Meadow Hill were out shooting woodchucks, and not
                far from the Gardner place bagged a very peculiar specimen. The proportions of its body seemed slightly altered in a queer way impossible to
                describe, while its face had taken on an expression which no one ever saw in a
                woodchuck before. The boys were genuinely frightened, and threw the thing away at once, so that only
                their grotesque tales of it ever reached the people of the countryside. But the shying of horses near Nahum's house had now become an acknowledged thing,
                and all the basis for a cycle of whispered legend was fast taking form.People vowed that the snow melted faster around Nahum's than it did anywhere else,
                and early in March there was an awed discussion in Potter's general store at Clark's
                Corners. Stephen Rice had driven past Gardner's in the morning, and had noticed the
                skunk-cabbages coming up through the mud by the woods across the road. Never were things of such size seen before, and they held strange colours that could
                not be put into any words. Their shapes were monstrous, and the horse had snorted at an odour which struck
                Stephen as wholly unprecedented. That afternoon several persons drove past to see the abnormal growth, and all agreed
                that plants of that kind ought never to sprout in a healthy world. The bad fruit of the fall before was freely mentioned, and it went from mouth to
                mouth that there was poison in Nahum's ground. Of course it was the meteorite; and remembering how strange the men from the college
                had found that stone to be, several farmers spoke about the matter to them.One day they paid Nahum a visit; but having no love of wild tales and folklore were
                very conservative in what they inferred. The plants were certainly odd, but all skunk-cabbages are more or less odd in shape
                and hue. Perhaps some mineral element from the stone had entered the soil, but it would soon
                be washed away. And as for the footprints and frightened horses--of course this was mere country
                talk which such a phenomenon as the aerolite would be certain to start. There was really nothing for serious men to do in cases of wild gossip, for
                superstitious rustics will say and believe anything. And so all through the strange days the professors stayed away in contempt. Only one of them, when given two phials of dust for analysis in a police job over a
                year and a half later, recalled that the queer colour of that skunk-cabbage had been
                very like one of the anomalous bands of light shown by the meteor fragment in the
                college spectroscope, and like the brittle globule found imbedded in the stone from
                the abyss. The samples in this analysis case gave the same odd bands at first, though later
                they lost the property.The trees budded prematurely around Nahum's, and at night they swayed ominously in
                the wind. Nahum's second son Thaddeus, a lad of fifteen, swore that they
                swayed also when there was no wind; but even the gossips would not credit
                this. Certainly, however, restlessness was in the air. The entire
                Gardner family developed the habit of stealthy listening, though not for any sound
                which they could consciously name. The listening was, indeed, rather a
                product of moments when consciousness seemed half to slip away.April brought a kind of madness to the country folk, and began that disuse of the
                road past Nahum's which led to its ultimate abandonment. It was next the vegetation. All the orchard trees blossomed forth in strange colours, and through the stony soil
                of the yard and adjacent pasturage there sprang up a bizarre growth which only a
                botanist could connect with the proper flora of the region. No sane wholesome colours were anywhere to be seen except in the green grass and
                leafage; but everywhere were those hectic and prismatic variants of some diseased,
                underlying primary tone without a place among the known tints of earth. The "Dutchman's breeches" became a thing of sinister menace, and the
                bloodroots grew insolent in their chromatic perversion. Ammi and the Gardners thought that most of the colours had a sort of haunting
                familiarity, and decided that they reminded one of the brittle globule in the
                meteor. Nahum ploughed and sowed the ten-acre pasture and the upland lot, but did nothing
                with the land around the house. He knew it would be of no use, and hoped that the summer's strange growths would
                draw all the poison from the soil. He was prepared for almost anything now, and had grown used to the sense of
                something near him waiting to be heard. The shunning of his house by neighbours told on him, of course; but it told on his
                wife more. The boys were better off, being at school each day; but they could not help being
                frightened by the gossip. Thaddeus, an especially sensitive youth, suffered the most.In May the insects came, and Nahum's place became a nightmare of buzzing and
                crawling. Most of the creatures seemed not quite usual in their aspects and motions, and their
                nocturnal habits contradicted all former experience. The Gardners took to watching at night--watching in all directions at random for
                something they could not tell what. It was then that they all owned that Thaddeus had been right about the trees. Mrs. Gardner was the next to see it from the window as she watched the swollen boughs of
                a maple against a moonlit sky. The boughs surely moved, and there was no wind. It must be the sap. Strangeness had come into everything growing now. Yet it was none of Nahum's family at all who made the next discovery. Familiarity had dulled them, and what they could not see was glimpsed by a timid
                windmill salesman from Bolton who drove by one night in ignorance of the country
                legends. What he told in Arkham was given a short paragraph in the _Gazette_; and it was
                there that all the farmers, Nahum included, saw it first. The night had been dark and the buggy-lamps faint, but around a farm in the valley
                which everyone knew from the account must be Nahum's, the darkness had been less
                thick. A dim though distinct luminosity seemed to inhere in all the vegetation, grass,
                leaves, and blossoms alike, while at one moment a detached piece of the
                phosphorescence appeared to stir furtively in the yard near the barn.The grass had so far seemed untouched, and the cows were freely pastured in the lot
                near the house, but toward the end of May the milk began to be bad. Then Nahum had the cows driven to the uplands, after which this trouble ceased. Not long after this the change in grass and leaves became apparent to the eye. All the verdure was going grey, and was developing a highly singular quality of
                brittleness. Ammi was now the only person who ever visited the place, and his visits were
                becoming fewer and fewer. When school closed the Gardners were virtually cut off from the world, and sometimes
                let Ammi do their errands in town. They were failing curiously both physically and mentally, and no one was surprised
                when the news of Mrs. Gardner's madness stole around.It happened in June, about the anniversary of the meteor's fall, and the poor woman
                screamed about things in the air which she could not describe. In her raving there was not a single specific noun, but only verbs and pronouns. Things moved and changed and fluttered, and ears tingled to impulses which were not
                wholly sounds. Something was taken away--she was being drained of something--something was
                fastening itself on her that ought not to be--someone must make it keep off--nothing
                was ever still in the night--the walls and windows shifted. Nahum did not send her to the county asylum, but let her wander about the house as
                long as she was harmless to herself and others. Even when her expression changed he did nothing. But when the boys grew afraid of her, and Thaddeus nearly fainted at the way she
                made faces at him, he decided to keep her locked in the attic. By July she had ceased to speak and crawled on all fours, and before that month was
                over Nahum got the mad notion that she was slightly luminous in the dark, as he now
                clearly saw was the case with the nearby vegetation.It was a little before this that the horses had stampeded. Something had aroused them in the night, and their neighing and kicking in their
                stalls had been terrible. There seemed virtually nothing to do to calm them, and when Nahum opened the stable
                door they all bolted out like frightened woodland deer. It took a week to track all four, and when found they were seen to be quite useless
                and unmanageable. Something had snapped in their brains, and each one had to be shot for its own
                good. Nahum borrowed a horse from Ammi for his haying, but found it would not approach the
                barn. It shied, balked, and whinnied, and in the end he could do nothing but drive it into
                the yard while the men used their own strength to get the heavy wagon near enough
                the hayloft for convenient pitching. And all the while the vegetation was turning grey and brittle. Even the flowers whose hues had been so strange were graying now, and the fruit was
                coming out grey and dwarfed and tasteless. The asters and goldenrod bloomed grey and distorted, and the roses and zinnias and
                hollyhocks in the front yard were such blasphemous-looking things that Nahum's
                oldest boy Zenas cut them down. The strangely puffed insects died about that time, even the bees that had left their
                hives and taken to the woods.By September all the vegetation was fast crumbling to a greyish powder, and Nahum
                feared that the trees would die before the poison was out of the soil. His wife now had spells of terrific screaming, and he and the boys were in a
                constant state of nervous tension. They shunned people now, and when school opened the boys did not go. But it was Ammi, on one of his rare visits, who first realized that the well water
                was no longer good. It had an evil taste that was not exactly fetid nor exactly salty, and Ammi advised
                his friend to dig another well on higher ground to use till the soil was good
                again. Nahum, however, ignored the warning, for he had by that time become calloused to
                strange and unpleasant things. He and the boys continued to use the tainted supply, drinking it as listlessly and
                mechanically as they ate their meagre and ill-cooked meals and did their thankless
                and monotonous chores through the aimless days. There was something of stolid resignation about them all, as if they walked half in
                another world between lines of nameless guards to a certain and familiar doom.Thaddeus went mad in September after a visit to the well. He had gone with a pail and had come back empty-handed, shrieking and waving his
                arms, and sometimes lapsing into an inane titter or a whisper about "the
                    moving colours down there." Two in one family was pretty bad, but Nahum was very brave about it. He let the boy
                run about for a week until he began stumbling and hurting himself, and then he shut
                him in an attic room across the hall from his mother's. The way they screamed at each other from behind their locked doors was very terrible,
                especially to little Merwin, who fancied they talked in some terrible language that
                was not of earth.Merwin was getting frightfully imaginative, and his restlessness was worse after the
                shutting away of the brother who had been his greatest playmate. Almost at the same time the mortality among the livestock commenced. Poultry turned greyish and died very quickly, their meat being found dry and noisome
                upon cutting. Hogs grew inordinately fat, then suddenly began to undergo loathsome changes which
                no one could explain. Their meat was of course useless, and Nahum was at his wit's end. No rural veterinary would approach his place, and the city veterinary from Arkham
                was openly baffled. The swine began growing grey and brittle and falling to pieces before they died, and
                their eyes and muzzles developed singular alterations. It was very inexplicable, for they had never been fed from the tainted
                vegetation. Then something struck the cows. Certain areas or sometimes the whole body would be uncannily shrivelled or
                compressed, and atrocious collapses or disintegrations were common. In the last stages--and death was always the result--there would be a greying and
                turning brittle like that which beset the hogs. There could be no question of poison, for all the cases occurred in a locked and
                undisturbed barn. No bites of prowling things could have brought the virus, for what live beast of
                earth can pass through solid obstacles? It must be only natural disease--yet what disease could wreak such results was
                beyond any mind's guessing. When the harvest came there was not an animal surviving on the place, for the stock
                and poultry were dead and the dogs had run away. These dogs, three in number, had all vanished one night and were never heard of
                again. The five cats had left some time before, but their going was scarcely noticed since
                there now seemed to be no mice, and only Mrs. Gardner had made pets of the graceful felines.On the nineteenth of October Nahum staggered into Ammi's house with hideous news. The death had come to poor Thaddeus in his attic room, and it had come in a way
                which could not be told. Nahum had dug a grave in the railed family plot behind the farm, and had put therein
                what he found. There could have been nothing from outside, for the small barred window and locked
                door were intact; but it was much as it had been in the barn. Ammi and his wife consoled the stricken man as best they could, but shuddered as
                they did so. Stark terror seemed to cling round the Gardners and all they touched, and the very
                presence of one in the house was a breath from regions unnamed and unnameable. Ammi accompanied Nahum home with the greatest reluctance, and did what he might to
                calm the hysterical sobbing of little Merwin. Zenas needed no calming. He had come of late to do nothing but stare into space and obey what his father told
                him; and Ammi thought that his fate was very merciful. Now and then Merwin's screams were answered faintly from the attic, and in response
                to an inquiring look Nahum said that his wife was getting very feeble. When night approached, Ammi managed to get away; for not even friendship could make
                him stay in that spot when the faint glow of the vegetation began and the trees may
                or may not have swayed without wind. It was really lucky for Ammi that he was not more imaginative. Even as things were, his mind was bent ever so slightly; but had he been able to
                connect and reflect upon all the portents around him he must inevitably have turned
                a total maniac. In the twilight he hastened home, the screams of the mad woman and the nervous child
                ringing horrible in his ears.Three days later Nahum burst into Ammi's kitchen in the early morning, and in the
                absence of his host stammered out a desperate tale once more, while Mrs. Pierce listened in a clutching fright. It was little Merwin this time. He was gone. He had gone out late at night with a lantern and pail for water, and had never come
                back. He'd been going to pieces for days, and hardly knew what he was about. Screamed at everything. There had been a frantic shriek from the yard then, but before the father could get
                to the door the boy was gone. There was no glow from the lantern he had taken, and of the child himself no
                trace. At the time Nahum thought the lantern and pail were gone too; but when dawn came,
                and the man had plodded back from his all-night search of the woods and fields, he
                had found some very curious things near the well. There was a crushed and apparently somewhat melted mass of iron which had certainly
                been the lantern; while a bent pail and twisted iron hoops beside it, both
                half-fused, seemed to hint at the remnants of the pail. That was all. Nahum was past imagining, Mrs. Pierce was blank, and Ammi, when he had reached home and heard the tale, could give
                no guess. Merwin was gone, and there would be no use in telling the people around, who shunned
                all Gardners now. No use, either, in telling the city people at Arkham who laughed at everything. Thad was gone, and now Merwin was gone. Something was creeping and creeping and waiting to be seen and heard. Nahum would go soon, and he wanted Ammi to look after his wife and Zenas if they
                survived him. It must all be a judgment of some sort; though he could not fancy what for, since he
                had always walked uprightly in the Lord's ways so far as he knew.For over two weeks Ammi saw nothing of Nahum; and then, worried about what might have
                happened, he overcame his fears and paid the Gardner place a visit. There was no smoke from the great chimney, and for a moment the visitor was
                apprehensive of the worst. The aspect of the whole farm was shocking--greyish withered grass and leaves on the
                ground, vines falling in brittle wreckage from archaic walls and gables, and great
                bare trees clawing up at the grey November sky with a studied malevolence which Ammi
                could not but feel had come from some subtle change in the tilt of the branches. But Nahum was alive, after all. He was weak, and lying in a couch in the low-ceiled kitchen, but perfectly conscious
                and able to give simple orders to Zenas. The room was deadly cold; and as Ammi visibly shivered, the host shouted huskily to
                Zenas for more wood. Wood, indeed, was sorely needed; since the cavernous fireplace was unlit and empty,
                with a cloud of soot blowing about in the chill wind that came down the chimney. Presently Nahum asked him if the extra wood had made him any more comfortable, and
                then Ammi saw what had happened. The stoutest cord had broken at last, and the hapless farmer's mind was proof
                against more sorrow.Questioning tactfully, Ammi could get no clear data at all about the missing
                Zenas."In the well--he lives in the well--" was all that the clouded father
                would say. Then there flashed across the visitor's mind a sudden thought of the mad
                wife, and he changed his line of inquiry."Nabby? Why, here she is!" was the surprised response of poor Nahum,
                and Ammi soon saw that he must search for himself. Leaving the harmless babbler on
                the couch, he took the keys from their nail beside the door and climbed the creaking
                stairs to the attic. It was very close and noisome up there, and no sound could be
                heard from any direction. Of the four doors in sight, only one was locked, and on this he tried various keys
                on the ring he had taken. The third key proved the right one, and after some fumbling Ammi threw open the low
                white door. It was quite dark inside, for the window was small and half-obscured by the crude
                wooden bars; and Ammi could see nothing at all on the wide-planked floor. The stench was beyond enduring, and before proceeding further he had to retreat to
                another room and return with his lungs filled with breathable air. When he did enter he saw something dark in the corner, and upon seeing it more
                clearly he screamed outright. While he screamed he thought a momentary cloud eclipsed the window, and a second
                later he felt himself brushed as if by some hateful current of vapour. Strange colours danced before his eyes; and had not a present horror numbed him he
                would have thought of the globule in the meteor that the geologist's hammer had
                shattered, and of the morbid vegetation that had sprouted in the spring. As it was he thought only of the blasphemous monstrosity which confronted him, and
                which all too clearly had shared the nameless fate of young Thaddeus and the
                livestock. But the terrible thing about the horror was that it very slowly and perceptibly
                moved as it continued to crumble.Ammi would give me no added particulars of this scene, but the shape in the corners
                does not re-appear in his tale as a moving object. There are things which cannot be mentioned, and what is done in common humanity is
                sometimes cruelly judged by the law. I gathered that no moving thing was left in that attic room, and that to leave
                anything capable of motion there would have been a deed so monstrous as to damn any
                accountable being to eternal torment. Anyone but a stolid farmer would have fainted or gone mad, but Ammi walked conscious
                through that low doorway and locked the accursed secret behind him. There would be Nahum to deal with now; he must be fed and tended, and removed to
                some place where he could be cared for.Commencing his descent of the dark stairs, Ammi heard a thud below him. He even thought a scream had been suddenly choked off, and recalled nervously the
                clammy vapour which had brushed by him in that frightful room above. What presence had his cry and entry started up? Halted by some vague fear, he heard still further sounds below. Indubitably there was a sort of heavy dragging, and a most detestably sticky noise
                as of some fiendish and unclean species of suction. With an associative sense goaded to feverish heights, he thought unaccountably of
                what he had seen upstairs. Good God! What eldritch dream-world was this into which he had blundered? He dared move neither backward nor forward, but stood there trembling at the black
                curve of the boxed-in staircase. Every trifle of the scene burned itself into his brain. The sounds, the sense of dread expectancy, the darkness, the steepness of the narrow
                steps--and merciful Heaven!--the faint but unmistakable luminosity of all the woodwork in sight; steps, sides,
                exposed laths, and beams alike.Then there burst forth a frantic whinny from Ammi's horse outside, followed at once
                by a clatter which told of a frenzied runaway. In another moment horse and buggy had gone beyond earshot, leaving the frightened
                man on the dark stairs to guess what had sent them. But that was not all. There had been another sound out there. A sort of liquid splash--water--it must have been the well. He had left Hero untied near it, and a buggy-wheel must have brushed the coping and
                knocked in a stone. And still the pale phosphorescense glowed in that detestably ancient woodwork. God! how old the house was! Most of it built before 1700.A feeble scratching on the floor downstairs now sounded distinctly, and Ammi's grip
                tightened on a heavy stick he had picked up in the attic for some purpose. Slowly nerving himself, he finished his descent and walked boldly toward the
                kitchen. But he did not complete the walk, because what he sought was no longer there. It had come to meet him, and it was still alive after a fashion. Whether it had crawled or whether it had been dragged by any external forces, Ammi
                could not say; but the death had been at it. Everything had happened in the last half-hour, but collapse, greying, and
                disintegration were already far advanced. There was a horrible brittleness, and dry fragments were scaling off. Ammi could not touch it, but looked horrifiedly into the distorted parody that had
                been a face."What was it, Nahum--what was it?" He whispered, and the cleft,
                bulging lips were just able to crackle out a final answer.But that was all. That which spoke could speak no more because it had completely caved in. Ammi laid a red checked tablecloth over what was left and reeled out the back door
                into the fields. He climbed the slope to the ten-acre pasture and stumbled home by the north road and
                the woods. He could not pass that well from which his horses had run away. He had looked at it through the window, and had seen that no stone was missing from
                the rim. Then the lurching buggy had not dislodged anything after all--the splash had been
                something else--something which went into the well after it had done with poor
                Nahum....When Ammi reached his house the horses and buggy had arrived before him and thrown
                his wife into fits of anxiety. Reassuring her without explanations, he set out at once for Arkham and notified the
                authorities that the Gardner family was no more. He indulged in no details, but merely told of the deaths of Nahum and Nabby, that of
                Thaddeus being already known, and mentioned that the cause seemed to be the same
                strange ailment which had killed the livestock. He also stated that Merwin and Zenas had disappeared. There was considerable questioning at the police station, and in the end Ammi was
                compelled to take three officers to the Gardner farm, together with the coroner, the
                medical examiner, and the veterinary who had treated the diseased animals. He went much against his will, for the afternoon was advancing and he feared the
                fall of night over that accursed place, but it was some comfort to have so many
                people with him.The six men drove out in a democrat-wagon, following Ammi's buggy, and arrived at the
                pest-ridden farmhouse about four o'clock. Used as the officers were to gruesome experiences, not one remained unmoved at what
                was found in the attic and under the red checked tablecloth on the floor below. The whole aspect of the farm with its grey desolation was terrible enough, but those
                two crumbling objects were beyond all bounds. No one could look long at them, and even the medical examiner admitted that there
                was very little to examine. Specimens could be analysed, of course, so he busied himself in obtaining them--and
                here it develops that a very puzzling aftermath occurred at the college laboratory
                where the two phials of dust were finally taken. Under the spectroscope both samples gave off an unknown spectrum, in which many of
                the baffling bands were precisely like those which the strange meteor had yielded in
                the previous year. The property of emitting this spectrum vanished in a month, the dust thereafter
                consisting mainly of alkaline phosphates and carbonates.Ammi would not have told the men about the well if he had thought they meant to do
                anything then and there. It was getting toward sunset, and he was anxious to be away. But he could not help glancing nervously at the stony curb by the great sweep, and
                when a detective questioned him he admitted that Nahum had feared something down
                there--so much so that he had never even thought of searching it for Merwin or
                Zenas. After that nothing would do but that they empty and explore the well immediately, so
                Ammi had to wait trembling while pail after pail of rank water was hauled up and
                splashed on the soaking ground outside. The men sniffed in disgust at the fluid, and toward the last held their noses
                against the foetor they were uncovering. It was not so long a job as they had feared it would be, since the water was
                phenomenally low. There is no need to speak too exactly of what they found. Merwin and Zenas were both there, in part, though the vestiges were mainly
                skeletal. There were also a small deer and a large dog in about the same state, and a number
                of bones of smaller animals. The ooze and slime at the bottom seemed inexplicably porous and bubbling, and a man
                who descended on hand-holds with a long pole found that he could sink the wooden
                shaft to any depth in the mud of the floor without meeting any solid
                obstruction.Twilight had now fallen, and lanterns were brought from the house. Then, when it was seen that nothing further could be gained from the well, everyone
                went indoors and conferred in the ancient sitting-room while the intermittent light
                of a spectral half-moon played wanly on the grey desolation outside. The men were frankly nonplussed by the entire case, and could find no convincing
                common element to link the strange vegetable conditions, the unknown disease of
                livestock and humans, and the unaccountable deaths of Merwin and Zenas in the
                tainted well. They had heard the common country talk, it is true; but could not believe that
                anything contrary to natural law had occurred. No doubt the meteor had poisoned the soil, but the illness of person and animals who
                had eaten nothing grown in that soil was another matter. Was it the well water? Very possibly. It might be a good idea to analyse it. But what peculiar madness could have made both boys jump into the well? Their deeds were so similar--and the fragments showed that they had both suffered
                from the grey brittle death. Why was everything so grey and brittle?It was the coroner, seated near a window overlooking the yard, who first noticed the
                glow about the well. Night had fully set in, and all the abhorrent grounds seemed faintly luminous with
                more than the fitful moonbeams; but this new glow was something definite and
                distinct, and appeared to shoot up from the black pit like a softened ray from a
                searchlight, giving dull reflections in the little ground pools where the water had
                been emptied. It had a very queer colour, and as all the men clustered round the window Ammi gave
                a violent start. For this strange beam of ghastly miasma was to him of no unfamiliar hue. He had seen that colour before, and feared to think what it might mean. He had seen it in the nasty brittle globule in that aerolite two summers ago, had
                seen it in the crazy vegetation of the springtime, and had thought he had seen it
                for an instant that very morning against the small barred window of that terrible
                attic room where nameless things had happened. It had flashed there a second, and a clammy and hateful current of vapour had
                brushed past him--and then poor Nahum had been taken by something of that
                colour. He had said so at the last--said it was like the globule and the plants. After that had come the runaway in the yard and the splash in the well--and now that
                well was belching forth to the night a pale insidious beam of the same demoniac
                tint.It does credit to the alertness of Ammi's mind that he puzzled even at that tense
                moment over a point which was essentially scientific. He could not but wonder at his gleaning of the same impression from a vapour
                glimpsed in the daytime, against a window opening in the morning sky, and from a
                nocturnal exhalation seen as a phosphorescent mist against the black and blasted
                landscape. It wasn't right--it was against Nature--and he thought of those terrible last words
                of his stricken friend, "It come from some place whar things ain't as they is
                    here ... one o' them professors said so...."All three horses outside, tied to a pair of shrivelled saplings by the road, were now
                neighing and pawing frantically. The wagon driver started for the door to do something, but Ammi laid a shaky hand on
                his shoulder.
                "Dun't go out thar," he whispered.
                "They's more to this nor what we know. Nahum said somethin' lived in the well
                    that sucks your life out.
             He said it must be some'at growed from a round ball like one we all seen in the
                meteor stone that fell a year ago June. Sucks an' burns, he said, an' is jest a cloud of colour like that light out thar
                now, that ye can hardly see an' can't tell what it is. Nahum thought it feeds on everything livin' an' gits stronger all the time. He said he seen it this last week. It must be somethin' from away off in the sky like the men from the college last
                year says the meteor stone was. The way it's made an' the way it works ain't like no way o' God's world. It's some'at from beyond."So the men paused indecisively as the light from the well grew stronger and the
                hitched horses pawed and whinnied in increasing frenzy. It was truly an awful moment; with terror in that ancient and accursed house itself,
                four monstrous sets of fragments--two from the house and two from the well--in the
                woodshed behind, and that shaft of unknown and unholy iridescence from the slimy
                depths in front. Ammi had restrained the driver on impulse, forgetting how uninjured he himself was
                after the clammy brushing of that coloured vapour in the attic room, but perhaps it
                is just as well that he acted as he did. No one will ever know what was abroad that night; and though the blasphemy from
                beyond had not so far hurt any human of unweakened mind, there is no telling what it
                might not have done at that last moment, and with its seemingly increased strength
                and the special signs of purpose it was soon to display beneath the half-clouded
                moonlit sky.All at once one of the detectives at the window gave a short, sharp gasp. The others looked at him, and then quickly followed his own gaze upward to the point
                at which its idle straying had been suddenly arrested. There was no need for words. What had been disputed in country gossip was disputable no longer, and it is because
                of the thing which every man of that party agreed in whispering later on, that
                strange days are never talked about in Arkham. It is necessary to premise that there was no wind at that hour of the evening. One did arise not long afterward, but there was absolutely none then. Even the dry tips of the lingering hedge-mustard, grey and blighted, and the fringe
                on the roof of the standing democrat-wagon were unstirred. And yet amid that tense, godless calm the high bare boughs of all the trees in the
                yard were moving. They were twitching morbidly and spasmodically, clawing in convulsive and epileptic
                madness at the moonlit clouds; scratching impotently in the noxious air as if jerked
                by some allied and bodiless line of linkage with sub-terrene horrors writhing and
                struggling below the black roots.Not a man breathed for several seconds. Then a cloud of darker depth passed over the moon, and the silhouette of clutching
                branches faded out momentarily. At this there was a general cry; muffled with awe, but husky and almost identical
                from every throat. For the terror had not faded with the silhouette, and in a fearsome instant of
                deeper darkness the watchers saw wriggling at the treetop height a thousand tiny
                points of faint and unhallowed radiance, tipping each bough like the fire of St. Elmo or the flames that come down on the apostles' heads at Pentecost. It was a monstrous constellation of unnatural light, like a glutted swarm of
                corpse-fed fireflies dancing hellish sarabands over an accursed marsh; and its
                colour was that same nameless intrusion which Ammi had come to recognise and
                dread. All the while the shaft of phosphorescence from the well was getting brighter and
                brighter, bringing to the minds of the huddled men, a sense of doom and abnormality
                which far outraced any image their conscious minds could form. It was no longer _shining_ out; it was _pouring_ out; and as the shapeless stream of
                unplaceable colour left the well it seemed to flow directly into the sky.The veterinary shivered, and walked to the front door to drop the heavy extra bar
                across it. Ammi shook no less, and had to tug and point for lack of a controllable voice when
                he wished to draw notice to the growing luminosity of the trees. The neighing and stamping of the horses had become utterly frightful, but not a soul
                of that group in the old house would have ventured forth for any earthly reward. With the moments the shining of the trees increased, while their restless branches
                seemed to strain more and more toward verticality. The wood of the well-sweep was shining now, and presently a policeman dumbly pointed
                to some wooden sheds and beehives near the stone wall on the west. They were commencing to shine, too, though the tethered vehicles of the visitors
                seemed so far unaffected. Then there was a wild commotion and clopping in the road, and as Ammi quenched the
                lamp for better seeing they realized that the span of frantic grays had broken their
                sapling and run off with the democrat-wagon.The shock served to loosen several tongues, and embarrassed whispers were
                exchanged."It spreads on everything organic that's been around here," muttered
                the medical examiner. No one replied, but the man who had been in the well gave a hint that his long pole
                must have stirred up something intangible."It was awful," he added.
                "There was no bottom at all. Just ooze and bubbles and the feeling of
                    something lurking under there."
             Ammi's horse still pawed and screamed deafeningly in the road outside, and nearly
                drowned its owner's faint quaver as he mumbled his formless reflections.
                "It come from that stone--it growed down thar--it got everything livin'--it
                    fed itself on 'em, mind and body--Thad an' Merwin, Zenas an' Nabby--Nahum was
                    the last--they all drunk the water--it got strong on 'em--it come from beyond,
                    whar things ain't like they be here--now it's goin' home--"
            At this point, as the column of unknown colour flared suddenly stronger and began to
                weave itself into fantastic suggestions of shape which each spectator later
                described differently, there came from poor tethered Hero such a sound as no man
                before or since ever heard from a horse. Every person in that low-pitched sitting-room stopped his ears, and Ammi turned away
                from the window in horror and nausea. Words could not convey it--when Ammi looked out again the hapless beast lay huddled
                inert on the moonlit ground between the splintered shafts of the buggy. That was the last of Hero till they buried him next day. But the present was no time to mourn, for almost at this instant a detective
                silently called attention to something terrible in the very room with them. In the absence of the lamplight it was clear that a faint phosphorescence had begun
                to pervade the entire apartment. It glowed on the broad-planked floor where the rag carpet left it bare, and
                shimmered over the sashes of the small-paned windows. It ran up and down the exposed corner-posts, coruscated about the shelf and mantel,
                and infected the very doors and furniture. Each minute saw it strengthen, and at last it was very plain that healthy living
                things must leave that house.Ammi showed them the back door and the path up through the fields to the ten-acre
                pasture. They walked and stumbled as in a dream, and did not dare look back till they were
                far away on the high ground. They were glad of the path, for they could not have gone the front way, by that
                well. It was bad enough passing the glowing barn and sheds, and those shining orchard
                trees with their gnarled, fiendish contours; but thank Heaven the branches did their
                worst twisting high up. The moon went under some very black clouds as they crossed the rustic bridge over
                Chapman's Brook, and it was blind groping from there to the open meadows.When they looked back toward the valley and the distant Gardner place at the bottom
                they saw a fearsome sight. All the farm was shining with the hideous unknown blend of colour; trees, buildings,
                and even such grass and herbage as had not been wholly changed to lethal grey
                brittleness. The boughs were all straining skyward, tipped with tongues of foul flame, and
                lambent tricklings of the same monstrous fire were creeping about the ridgepoles of
                the house, barn and sheds. It was a scene from a vision of Fuseli, and over all the rest reigned that riot of
                luminous amorphousness, that alien and undimensioned rainbow of cryptic poison from
                the well--seething, feeling, lapping, reaching, scintillating, straining, and
                malignly bubbling in its cosmic and unrecognizable chromaticism.Then without warning the hideous thing shot vertically up toward the sky like a
                rocket or meteor, leaving behind no trail and disappearing through a round and
                curiously regular hole in the clouds before any man could gasp or cry out. No watcher can ever forget that sight, and Ammi stared blankly at the stars of
                Cygnus, Deneb twinkling above the others, where the unknown colour had melted into
                the Milky Way. But his gaze was the next moment called swiftly to earth by the crackling in the
                valley. It was just that. Only a wooden ripping and crackling, and not an explosion, as so many others of the
                party vowed. Yet the outcome was the same, for in one feverish kaleidoscopic instant there burst
                up from that doomed and accursed farm a gleamingly eruptive cataclysm of unnatural
                sparks and substance; blurring the glance of the few who saw it, and sending forth
                to the zenith a bombarding cloudburst of such coloured and fantastic fragments as
                our universe must needs disown. Through quickly re-closing vapours they followed the great morbidity that had
                vanished, and in another second they had vanished too. Behind and below was only a darkness to which the men dared not return, and all
                about was a mounting wind which seemed to sweep down in black, frore gusts from
                interstellar space. It shrieked and howled, and lashed the fields and distorted woods in a mad cosmic
                frenzy, till soon the trembling party realized it would be no use waiting for the
                moon to show what was left down there at Nahum's.Too awed even to hint theories, the seven shaking men trudged back toward Arkham by
                the north road. Ammi was worse than his fellows, and begged them to see him inside his own kitchen,
                instead of keeping straight on to town. He did not wish to cross the blighted, wind-whipped woods alone to his home on the
                main road. For he had had an added shock that the others were spared, and was crushed for ever
                with a brooding fear he dared not even mention for many years to come. As the rest of the watchers on that tempestuous hill had stolidly set their faces
                toward the road, Ammi had looked back an instant at the shadowed valley of
                desolation so lately sheltering his ill-starred friend. And from that stricken, far-away spot he had seen something feebly rise, only to
                sink down again upon the place from which the great shapeless horror had shot into
                the sky. It was just a colour--but not any colour of our earth or heavens. And because Ammi recognized that colour, and knew that this last faint remnant must
                still lurk down there in the well, he has never been quite right since.Ammi would never go near the place again. It is forty-four years now since
                the horror happened, but he has never been there, and will be glad when the new
                reservoir blots it out. I shall be glad, too, for I do not like the way the
                sunlight changed colour around the mouth of that abandoned well I passed. I
                hope the water will always be very deep--but even so, I shall never drink it.
                I do not think I shall visit the Arkham country hereafter. Three of the men
                who had been with Ammi returned the next morning to see the ruins by daylight, but
                there were not any real ruins. Only the bricks of the chimney, the stones of
                the cellar, some mineral and metallic litter here and there, and the rim of that
                nefandous well. Save for Ammi's dead horse, which they towed away and buried,
                and the buggy which they shortly returned to him, everything that had ever been
                living had gone. Five eldritch acres of dusty grey desert remained, nor has
                anything ever grown there since.The rural tales are queer. They might be even queerer if city men and college chemists could be interested
                enough to analyze the water from that disused well, or the grey dust that no wind
                seems ever to disperse. Botanists, too, ought to study the stunted flora on the borders of that spot, for
                they might shed light on the country notion that the blight is spreading--little by
                little, perhaps an inch a year. People say the colour of the neighboring herbage is not quite right in the spring,
                and that wild things leave queer prints in the light winter snow. Snow never seems quite so heavy on the blasted heath as it is elsewhere. Horses--the few that are left in this motor age--grow skittish in the silent valley;
                and hunters cannot depend on their dogs too near the splotch of greyish dust.They say the mental influences are very bad, too; numbers went queer in the years
                after Nahum's taking, and always they lacked the power to get away. Then the stronger-minded folk all left the region, and only the foreigners tried to
                live in the crumbling old homesteads. They could not stay, though; and one sometimes wonders what insight beyond ours
                their wild, weird stories of whispered magic have given them. Their dreams at night, they protest, are very horrible in that grotesque country;
                and surely the very look of the dark realm is enough to stir a morbid fancy. No traveler has ever escaped a sense of strangeness in those deep ravines, and
                artists shiver as they paint thick woods whose mystery is as much of the spirits as
                of the eye. I myself am curious about the sensation I derived from my one lone walk before Ammi
                told me his tale. When twilight came I had vaguely wished some clouds would gather, for odd timidity
                about the deep skyey voids above had crept into my soul.Do not ask me for my opinion. I do not know--that is all. There was no one but Ammi to question; for Arkham people will not talk about the
                strange days, and all three professors who saw the aerolite and its coloured globule
                are dead. There were other globules--depend upon that. One must have fed itself and escaped, and probably there was another which was too
                late. No doubt it is still down the well--I know there was something wrong with the
                sunlight I saw above that miasmal brink. The rustics say the blight creeps an inch a year, so perhaps there is a kind of
                growth or nourishment even now. But whatever demon hatchling is there, it must be tethered to something or else it
                would quickly spread. Is it fastened to the roots of those trees that claw the air? One of the current Arkham tales is about fat oaks that shine and move as they ought
                not to do at night.What it is, only God knows. In terms of matter I suppose the thing Ammi described would be called a gas, but
                this gas obeyed laws that are not of our cosmos. This was no fruit of such worlds and suns as shine on the telescopes and
                photographic plates of our observatories. This was no breath from the skies whose motions and dimensions our astronomers
                measure or deem too vast to measure. It was just a colour out of space--a frightful messenger from unformed realms of
                infinity beyond all Nature as we know it; from realms whose mere existence stuns the
                brain and numbs us with the black extra-cosmic gulfs it throws open before our
                frenzied eyes.I doubt very much if Ammi consciously lied to me, and I do not think his tale was all
                a freak of madness as the townsfolk had forewarned. Something terrible came to the hills and valleys on that meteor, and something
                terrible--though I know not in what proportion--still remains. I shall be glad to see the water come. Meanwhile I hope nothing will happen to Ammi. He saw so much of the thing--and its influence was so insidious. Why has he never been able to move away? How clearly he recalled those dying words of Nahum's--"can't git away--draws
                    ye--ye know summ'at's comin', but 'tain't no use--" Ammi is such a good old man--when the reservoir gang gets to work I must write the
                chief engineer to keep a sharp watch on him. I would hate to think of him as the grey, twisted, brittle monstrosity which
                persists more and more in troubling my sleep.[Footnote 1: Found among the papers of the late Francis Wayland Thurston, of
                    Boston. _1. The Horror in Clay.The most merciful thing in the world, I think, is the inability of the human mind
                    to correlate all its contents. We live on a placid island of ignorance in the midst of black seas of infinity,
                    and it was not meant that we should voyage far. The sciences, each straining in its own direction, have hitherto harmed us
                    little; but some day the piecing together of dissociated knowledge will open up
                    such terrifying vistas of reality, and of our frightful position therein, that
                    we shall either go mad from the revelation or flee from the deadly light into
                    the peace and safety of a new dark age.Theosophists have guessed at the awesome grandeur of the cosmic cycle wherein our
                    world and human race form transient incidents. They have hinted at strange survivals in terms which would freeze the blood if
                    not masked by a bland optimism. But it is not from them that there came the single glimpse of forbidden eons
                    which chills me when I think of it and maddens me when I dream of it. That glimpse, like all dread glimpses of truth, flashed out from an accidental
                    piecing together of separated things--in this case an old newspaper item and the
                    notes of a dead professor. I hope that no one else will accomplish this piecing out; certainly, if I live,
                    I shall never knowingly supply a link in so hideous a chain. I think that the professor, too, intended to keep silent regarding the part he
                    knew, and that he would have destroyed his notes had not sudden death seized
                    him.My knowledge of the thing began in the winter of 1926-27 with the death of my
                    grand-uncle, George Gammell Angell, Professor Emeritus of Semitic languages in
                    Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island. Professor Angell was widely known as an authority on ancient inscriptions, and
                    had frequently been resorted to by the heads of prominent museums; so that his
                    passing at the age of ninety-two may be recalled by many. Locally, interest was intensified by the obscurity of the cause of death. The professor had been stricken whilst returning from the Newport boat; falling
                    suddenly, as witnesses said, after having been jostled by a nautical-looking
                    negro who had come from one of the queer dark courts on the precipitous hillside
                    which formed a short cut from the waterfront to the deceased's home in Williams
                    Street. Physicians were unable to find any visible disorder, but concluded after
                    perplexed debate that some obscure lesion of the heart, induced by the brisk
                    ascent of so steep a hill by so elderly a man, was responsible for the end. At the time I saw no reason to dissent from this dictum, but latterly I am
                    inclined to wonder--and more than wonder.As my granduncle's heir and executor, for he died a childless widower, I was
                    expected to go over his papers with some thoroughness; and for that purpose
                    moved his entire set of files and boxes to my quarters in Boston. Much of the material which I correlated will be later published by the American
                    Archeological Society, but there was one box which I found exceedingly puzzling,
                    and which I felt much averse from showing to other eyes. It had been locked, and I did not find the key till it occurred to me to examine
                    the personal ring which the professor carried always in his pocket. Then, indeed, I succeeded in opening it, but when I did so seemed only to be
                    confronted by a greater and more closely locked barrier. For what could be the meaning of the queer clay bas-relief and the disjointed
                    jottings, ramblings, and cuttings which I found? Had my uncle, in his latter years, become credulous of the most superficial
                    impostures? I resolved to search out the eccentric sculptor responsible for this apparent
                    disturbance of an old man's peace of mind.The bas-relief was a rough rectangle less than an inch thick and about five by
                    six inches in area; obviously of modern origin. Its designs, however, were far from modern in atmosphere and suggestion; for,
                    although the vagaries of cubism and futurism are many and wild, they do not
                    often reproduce that cryptic regularity which lurks in prehistoric writing. And writing of some kind the bulk of these designs seemed certainly to be;
                    though my memory, despite much familiarity with the papers and collections of my
                    uncle, failed in any way to identify this particular species, or even hint at
                    its remotest affiliations.Above these apparent hieroglyphics was a figure of evidently pictorial intent,
                    though its impressionistic execution forbade a very clear idea of its
                    nature. It seemed to be a sort of monster, or symbol representing a monster, of a form
                    which only a diseased fancy could conceive. If I say that my somewhat extravagant imagination yielded simultaneous pictures
                    of an octopus, a dragon, and a human caricature, I shall not be unfaithful to
                    the spirit of the thing. A pulpy, tentacled head surmounted a grotesque and scaly body with rudimentary
                    wings; but it was the _general outline_ of the whole which made it most
                    shockingly frightful. Behind the figure was a vague suggestion of a Cyclopean architectural
                    background.The writing accompanying this oddity was, aside from a stack of press cuttings,
                    in Professor Angell's most recent hand; and made no pretense to literary
                    style. What seemed to be the main document was headed "_CTHULHU CULT_"
                    in characters painstakingly printed to avoid the erroneous reading of a word so
                    unheard-of. This manuscript was divided into two sections, the first of which was headed
                        "1925--Dream and Dream Work of H. A. Wilcox, 7 Thomas St.,
                        Providence, R. I.," and the second, "Narrative of Inspector
                        John R. Legrasse, 121 Bienville St., New Orleans, La., at 1908 A. A. S.
                        Mtg--Notes on Same, Prof. Webb's Acct." The other manuscript papers were all brief notes, some of them accounts of the
                    queer dreams of different persons, some of them citations from theosophical
                    books and magazines (notably W. Scott-Eliott's _Atlantis and the Lost Lemuria_), and the rest comments on
                    long-surviving secret societies and hidden cults, with references to passages in
                    such mythological and anthropological source-books as Frazer's _Golden Bough_
                    and Miss Murray's _Witch-Cult in Western Europe_. The cuttings largely alluded to outré mental illnesses and outbreaks of group
                    folly or mania in the spring of 1925.The first half of the principal manuscript told a very peculiar tale. It appears that on March 1st, 1925, a thin, dark young man of neurotic and
                    excited aspect had called upon Professor Angell bearing the singular clay
                    bas-relief, which was then exceedingly damp and fresh. His card bore the name of Henry Anthony Wilcox, and my uncle had recognized him
                    as the youngest son of an excellent family slightly known to him, who had
                    latterly been studying sculpture at the Rhode Island School of Design and living
                    alone at the Fleur-de-Lys Building near that institution. Wilcox was a precocious youth of known genius but great eccentricity, and had
                    from childhood excited attention through the strange stories and odd dreams he
                    was in the habit of relating. He called himself "psychically hypersensitive", but the staid
                    folk of the ancient commercial city dismissed him as merely
                        "queer". Never mingling much with his kind, he had dropped gradually from social
                    visibility, and was now known only to a small group of esthetes from other
                    towns. Even the Providence Art Club, anxious to preserve its conservatism, had found
                    him quite hopeless.On the occasion of the visit, ran the professor's manuscript, the sculptor
                    abruptly asked for the benefit of his host's archeological knowledge in
                    identifying the hieroglyphics on the bas-relief. He spoke in a dreamy, stilted manner which suggested pose and alienated
                    sympathy; and my uncle showed some sharpness in replying, for the conspicuous
                    freshness of the tablet implied kinship with anything but archeology. Young Wilcox's rejoinder, which impressed my uncle enough to make him recall and
                    record it verbatim, was of a fantastically poetic cast which must have typified
                    his whole conversation, and which I have since found highly characteristic of
                    him. He said, "It is new, indeed, for I made it last night in a dream of
                        strange cities; and dreams are older than brooding Tyre, or the
                        contemplative Sphinx, or garden-girdled Babylon."It was then that he began that rambling tale which suddenly played upon a
                    sleeping memory and won the fevered interest of my uncle. There had been a slight earthquake tremor the night before, the most
                    considerable felt in New England for some years; and Wilcox's imagination had
                    been keenly affected. Upon retiring, he had had an unprecedented dream of great Cyclopean cities of
                    Titan blocks and sky-flung monoliths, all dripping with green ooze and sinister
                    with latent horror. Hieroglyphics had covered the walls and pillars, and from some undetermined
                    point below had come a voice that was not a voice; a chaotic sensation which
                    only fancy could transmute into sound, but which he attempted to render by the
                    almost unpronounceable jumble of letters, "_Cthulhu fhtagn_".This verbal jumble was the key to the recollection which excited and disturbed
                    Professor Angell. He questioned the sculptor with scientific minuteness; and studied with almost
                    frantic intensity the bas-relief on which the youth had found himself working,
                    chilled and clad only in his nightclothes, when waking had stolen bewilderingly
                    over him. My uncle blamed his old age, Wilcox afterward said, for his slowness in
                    recognizing both hieroglyphics and pictorial design. Many of his questions seemed highly out of place to his visitor, especially
                    those which tried to connect the latter with strange cults or societies; and
                    Wilcox could not understand the repeated promises of silence which he was
                    offered in exchange for an admission of membership in some widespread mystical
                    or paganly religious body. When Professor Angell became convinced that the sculptor was indeed ignorant of
                    any cult or system of cryptic lore, he besieged his visitor with demands for
                    future reports of dreams. This bore regular fruit, for after the first interview the manuscript records
                    daily calls of the young man, during which he related startling fragments of
                    nocturnal imagery whose burden was always some terrible Cyclopean vista of dark
                    and dripping stone, with a subterrene voice or intelligence shouting
                    monotonously in enigmatical sense-impacts uninscribable save as gibberish. The two sounds most frequently repeated are those rendered by the letters
                        "_Cthulhu_" and "_R'lyeh_".On March 23rd, the manuscript continued, Wilcox failed to appear; and inquiries
                    at his quarters revealed that he had been stricken with an obscure sort of fever
                    and taken to the home of his family in Waterman Street. He had cried out in the night, arousing several other artists in the building,
                    and had manifested since then only alternations of unconsciousness and
                    delirium. My uncle at once telephoned the family, and from that time forward kept close
                    watch of the case; calling often at the Thayer Street office of Dr. Tobey, whom he learned to be in charge. The youth's febrile mind, apparently, was dwelling on strange things; and the
                    doctor shuddered now and then as he spoke of them. They included not only a repetition of what he had formerly dreamed, but touched
                    wildly on a gigantic thing "miles high" which walked or lumbered
                    about. He at no time fully described this object, but occasional frantic words, as
                    repeated by Dr. Tobey, convinced the professor that it must be identical with the nameless
                    monstrosity he had sought to depict in his dream-sculpture. Reference to this object, the doctor added, was invariably a prelude to the
                    young man's subsidence into lethargy. His temperature, oddly enough, was not greatly above normal; but the whole
                    condition was otherwise such as to suggest true fever rather than mental
                    disorder.On April 2nd at about 3 p. m. every trace of Wilcox's malady suddenly ceased. He sat upright in bed, astonished to find himself at home and completely
                    ignorant of what had happened in dream or reality since the night of March
                    22nd. Pronounced well by his physician, he returned to his quarters in three days; but
                    to Professor Angell he was of no further assistance. All traces of strange dreaming had vanished with his recovery, and my uncle kept
                    no record of his night-thoughts after a week of pointless and irrelevant
                    accounts of thoroughly usual visions.Here the first part of the manuscript ended, but references to certain of the
                    scattered notes gave me much material for thought--so much, in fact, that only
                    the ingrained skepticism then forming my philosophy can account for my continued
                    distrust of the artist. The notes in question were those descriptive of the dreams of various persons
                    covering the same period as that in which young Wilcox had had his strange
                    visitations. My uncle, it seems, had quickly instituted a prodigiously far-flung body of
                    inquiries amongst nearly all the friends whom he could question without
                    impertinence, asking for nightly reports of their dreams, and the dates of any
                    notable visions for some time past. The reception of his request seems to have been varied; but he must, at the very
                    least, have received more responses than any ordinary man could have handled
                    without a secretary. This original correspondence was not preserved, but his notes formed a thorough
                    and really significant digest. Average people in society and business--New England's traditional "salt
                        of the earth"--gave an almost completely negative result, though
                    scattered cases of uneasy but formless nocturnal impressions appear here and
                    there, always between March 23rd and April 2nd--the period of young Wilcox's
                    delirium. Scientific men were little more affected, though four cases of vague description
                    suggest fugitive glimpses of strange landscapes, and in one case there is
                    mentioned a dread of something abnormal.It was from the artists and poets that the pertinent answers came, and I know
                    that panic would have broken loose had they been able to compare notes. As it was, lacking their original letters, I half suspected the compiler of
                    having asked leading questions, or of having edited the correspondence in
                    corroboration of what he had latently resolved to see. That is why I continued to feel that Wilcox, somehow cognizant of the old data
                    which my uncle had possessed, had been imposing on the veteran scientist. These responses from esthetes told a disturbing tale. From February 28th to April 2nd a large proportion of them had dreamed very
                    bizarre things, the intensity of the dreams being immeasurably the stronger
                    during the period of the sculptor's delirium. Over a fourth of those who reported anything, reported scenes and half-sounds
                    not unlike those which Wilcox had described; and some of the dreamers confessed
                    acute fear of the gigantic nameless thing visible toward the last. One case, which the note describes with emphasis, was very sad. The subject, a widely known architect with leanings toward theosophy and
                    occultism, went violently insane on the date of young Wilcox's seizure, and
                    expired several months later after incessant screamings to be saved from some
                    escaped denizen of hell. Had my uncle referred to these cases by name instead of merely by number, I
                    should have attempted some corroboration and personal investigation; but as it
                    was, I succeeded in tracing down only a few. All of these, however, bore out the notes in full. I have often wondered if all the objects of the professor's questioning felt as
                    puzzled as did this fraction. It is well that no explanation shall ever reach them.The press cuttings, as I have intimated, touched on cases of panic, mania, and
                    eccentricity during the given period. Professor Angell must have employed a cutting bureau, for the number of extracts
                    was tremendous, and the sources scattered throughout the globe. Here was a nocturnal suicide in London, where a lone sleeper had leaped from a
                    window after a shocking cry. Here likewise a rambling letter to the editor of a paper in South America, where
                    a fanatic deduces a dire future from visions he has seen. A dispatch from California describes a theosophist colony as donning white robes
                    en masse for some "glorious fulfilment" which never arrives,
                    whilst items from India speak guardedly of serious native unrest toward the end
                    of March. Voodoo orgies multiply in Haiti, and African outposts report ominous
                    mutterings. American officers in the Philippines find certain tribes bothersome about this
                    time, and New York policemen are mobbed by hysterical Levantines on the night of
                    March 22-23. The west of Ireland, too, is full of wild rumor and legendry, and a fantastic
                    painter named Ardois-Bonnot hangs a blasphemous _Dream Landscape_ in the Paris
                    spring salon of 1926. And so numerous are the recorded troubles in insane asylums that only a miracle
                    can have stopped the medical fraternity from noting strange parallelisms and
                    drawing mystified conclusions. A weird bunch of cuttings, all told; and I can at this date scarcely envisage
                    the callous rationalism with which I set them aside. But I was then convinced that young Wilcox had known of the older matters
                    mentioned by the professor. _2. The Tale of Inspector Legrasse.The older matters which had made the sculptor's dream and bas-relief so
                    significant to my uncle formed the subject of the second half of his long
                    manuscript. Once before, it appears, Professor Angell had seen the hellish outlines of the
                    nameless monstrosity, puzzled over the unknown hieroglyphics, and heard the
                    ominous syllables which can be rendered only as "_Cthulhu_"; and
                    all this in so stirring and horrible a connection that it is small wonder he
                    pursued young Wilcox with queries and demands for data.This earlier experience had come in 1908, seventeen years before, when the
                    American Archeological Society held its annual meeting in St. Louis. Professor Angell, as befitted one of his authority and attainments, had had a
                    prominent part in all the deliberations; and was one of the first to be
                    approached by the several outsiders who took advantage of the convocation to
                    offer questions for correct answering and problems for expert solution.The chief of these outsiders, and in a short time the focus of interest for the
                    entire meeting, was a commonplace-looking middle-aged man who had traveled all
                    the way from New Orleans for certain special information unobtainable from any
                    local source. His name was John Raymond Legrasse, and he was by profession an inspector of
                    police. With him he bore the subject of his visit, a grotesque, repulsive, and
                    apparently very ancient stone statuette whose origin he was at a loss to
                    determine.It must not be fancied that Inspector Legrasse had the least interest in
                    archeology. On the contrary, his wish for enlightenment was prompted by purely professional
                    considerations. The statuette, idol, fetish, or whatever it was, had been captured some months
                    before in the wooded swamps south of New Orleans during a raid on a supposed
                    voodoo meeting; and so singular and hideous were the rites connected with it,
                    that the police could not but realize that they had stumbled on a dark cult
                    totally unknown to them, and infinitely more diabolic than even the blackest of
                    the African voodoo circles. Of its origin, apart from the erratic and unbelievable tales extorted from the
                    captured members, absolutely nothing was to be discovered; hence the anxiety of
                    the police for any antiquarian lore which might help them to place the frightful
                    symbol, and through it track down the cult to its fountain-head.Inspector Legrasse was scarcely prepared for the sensation which his offering
                    created. One sight of the thing had been enough to throw the assembled men of science
                    into a state of tense excitement, and they lost no time in crowding around him
                    to gaze at the diminutive figure whose utter strangeness and air of genuinely
                    abysmal antiquity hinted so potently at unopened and archaic vistas. No recognized school of sculpture had animated this terrible object, yet
                    centuries and even thousands of years seemed recorded in its dim and greenish
                    surface of unplaceable stone.The figure, which was finally passed slowly from man to man for close and careful
                    study, was between seven and eight inches in height, and of exquisitely artistic
                    workmanship. It represented a monster of vaguely anthropoid outline, but with an octopuslike
                    head whose face was a mass of feelers, a scaly, rubbery-looking body, prodigious
                    claws on hind and fore feet, and long, narrow wings behind. This thing, which seemed instinct with a fearsome and unnatural malignancy, was
                    of a somewhat bloated corpulence, and squatted evilly on a rectangular block or
                    pedestal covered with undecipherable characters. The tips of the wings touched the back edge of the block, the seat occupied the
                    center, whilst the long, curved claws of the doubled-up, crouching hind legs
                    gripped the front edge and extended a quarter of the way down toward the bottom
                    of the pedestal. The cephalopod head was bent forward, so that the ends of the facial feelers
                    brushed the backs of huge forepaws which clasped the croucher's elevated
                    knees. The aspect of the whole was abnormally lifelike, and the more subtly fearful
                    because its source was so totally unknown. Its vast, awesome, and incalculable age was unmistakable; yet not one link did
                    it show with any known type of art belonging to civilization's youth--or indeed
                    to any other time.Totally separate and apart, its very material was a mystery; for the soapy,
                    greenish-black stone with its golden or iridescent flecks and striations
                    resembled nothing familiar to geology or mineralogy. The characters along the base were equally baffling; and no member present,
                    despite a representation of half the world's expert learning in this field,
                    could form the least notion of even their remotest linguistic kinship. They, like the subject and material, belonged to something horribly remote and
                    distinct from mankind as we know it; something frightfully suggestive of old and
                    unhallowed cycles of life in which our world and our conceptions have no
                    part.And yet, as the members severally shook their heads and confessed defeat at the
                    inspector's problem, there was one man in that gathering who suspected a touch
                    of bizarre familiarity in the monstrous shape and writing, and who presently
                    told with some diffidence of the odd trifle he knew. This person was the late William Channing Webb, professor of anthropology in
                    Princeton University, and an explorer of no slight note.Professor Webb had been engaged, forty-eight years before, in a tour of Greenland
                    and Iceland in search of some Runic inscriptions which he failed to unearth; and
                    whilst high up on the West Greenland coast had encountered a singular tribe or
                    cult of degenerate Eskimos whose religion, a curious form of devil-worship,
                    chilled him with its deliberate bloodthirstiness and repulsiveness. It was a faith of which other Eskimos knew little, and which they mentioned only
                    with shudders, saying that it had come down from horribly ancient eons before
                    ever the world was made. Besides nameless rites and human sacrifices there were certain queer hereditary
                    rituals addressed to a supreme elder devil or _tornasuk_; and of this Professor
                    Webb had taken a careful phonetic copy from an aged _angekok_ or wizard-priest,
                    expressing the sounds in Roman letters as best he knew how. But just now of prime significance was the fetish which this cult had cherished,
                    and around which they danced when the aurora leaped high over the ice
                    cliffs. It was, the professor stated, a very crude bas-relief of stone, comprising a
                    hideous picture and some cryptic writing. And as far as he could tell, it was a rough parallel in all essential features
                    of the bestial thing now lying before the meeting.These data, received with suspense and astonishment by the assembled members,
                    proved doubly exciting to Inspector Legrasse; and he began at once to ply his
                    informant with questions. Having noted and copied an oral ritual among the swamp cult-worshipers his men
                    had arrested, he besought the professor to remember as best he might the
                    syllables taken down amongst the diabolist Eskimos. There then followed an exhaustive comparison of details, and a moment of really
                    awed silence when both detective and scientist agreed on the virtual identity of
                    the phrase common to two hellish rituals so many worlds of distance apart. What, in substance, both the Eskimo wizards and the Louisiana swamp-priests had
                    chanted to their kindred idols was something very like this--the word-divisions
                    being guessed at from traditional breaks in the phrase as chanted aloud: SLegrasse had one point in advance of Professor Webb, for several among his
                    mongrel prisoners had repeated to him what older celebrants had told them the
                    words meant. This text, as given, ran something like this: And now, in response to a general urgent demand, Inspector Legrasse related as
                    fully as possible his experience with the swamp worshipers; telling a story to
                    which I could see my uncle attached profound significance. It savored of the wildest dreams of myth-maker and theosophist, and disclosed an
                    astonishing degree of cosmic imagination among such half-castes and pariahs as
                    might be least expected to possess it.On November 1st, 1907, there had come to New Orleans police a frantic summons
                    from the swamp and lagoon country to the south. The squatters there, mostly primitive but good-natured descendants of Lafitte's
                    men, were in the grip of stark terror from an unknown thing which had stolen
                    upon them in the night. It was voodoo, apparently, but voodoo of a more terrible sort than they had ever
                    known; and some of their women and children had disappeared since the malevolent
                    tom-tom had begun its incessant beating far within the black haunted woods where
                    no dweller ventured. There were insane shouts and harrowing screams, soul-chilling chants and dancing
                    devil-flames; and, the frightened messenger added, the people could stand it no
                    more.So a body of twenty police, filling two carriages and an automobile, had set out
                    in the late afternoon with the shivering squatter as a guide. At the end of the passable road they alighted, and for miles splashed on in
                    silence through the terrible cypress woods where day never came. Ugly roots and malignant hanging nooses of Spanish moss beset them, and now and
                    then a pile of dank stones or fragments of a rotting wall intensified by its
                    hint of morbid habitation a depression which every malformed tree and every
                    fungous islet combined to create. At length the squatter settlement, a miserable huddle of huts, hove in sight;
                    and hysterical dwellers ran out to cluster around the group of bobbing
                    lanterns. The muffled beat of tom-toms was now faintly audible far, far ahead; and a
                    curdling shriek came at infrequent intervals when the wind shifted. A reddish glare, too, seemed to filter through the pale undergrowth beyond
                    endless avenues of forest night. Reluctant even to be left alone again, each one of the cowed squatters refused
                    point-blank to advance another inch toward the scene of unholy worship, so
                    Inspector Legrasse and his nineteen colleagues plunged on unguided into black
                    arcades of horror that none of them had ever trod before.The region now entered by the police was one of traditionally evil repute,
                    substantially unknown and untraversed by white men. There were legends of a hidden lake unglimpsed by mortal sight, in which dwelt a
                    huge, formless white polypous thing with luminous eyes; and squatters whispered
                    that bat-winged devils flew up out of caverns in inner earth to worship it at
                    midnight. They said it had been there before D'Iberville, before La Salle, before the
                    Indians, and before even the wholesome beasts and birds of the woods. It was nightmare itself, and to see it was to die. But it made men dream, and so they knew enough to keep away. The present voodoo orgy was, indeed, on the merest fringe of this abhorred area,
                    but that location was bad enough; hence perhaps the very place of the worship
                    had terrified the squatters more than the shocking sounds and incidents.Only poetry or madness could do justice to the noises heard by Legrasse's men as
                    they plowed on through the black morass toward the red glare and the muffled
                    tom-toms. There are vocal qualities peculiar to men, and vocal qualities peculiar to
                    beasts; and it is terrible to hear the one when the source should yield the
                    other. Animal fury and orgiastic license here whipped themselves to demoniac heights by
                    howls and squawking ecstasies that tore and reverberated through those nighted
                    woods like pestilential tempests from the gulfs of hell. Now and then the less organized ululations would cease, and from what seemed a
                    well-drilled chorus of hoarse voices would rise in singsong chant that hideous
                    phrase or ritual: Then the men, having reached a spot where the trees were thinner, came suddenly
                    in sight of the spectacle itself. Four of them reeled, one fainted, and two were shaken into a frantic cry which
                    the mad cacophony of the orgy fortunately deadened. Legrasse dashed swamp water on the face of the fainting man, and all stood
                    trembling and nearly hypnotized with horror.In a natural glade of the swamp stood a grassy island of perhaps an acre's
                    extent, clear of trees and tolerably dry. On this now leaped and twisted a more indescribable horde of human abnormality
                    than any but a Sime or an Angarola could paint. Void of clothing, this hybrid spawn were braying, bellowing and writhing about a
                    monstrous ring-shaped bonfire; in the center of which, revealed by occasional
                    rifts in the curtain of flame, stood a great granite monolith some eight feet in
                    height; on top of which, incongruous in its diminutiveness, rested the noxious
                    carven statuette. From a wide circle of ten scaffolds set up at regular intervals with the
                    flame-girt monolith as a center hung, head downward, the oddly marred bodies of
                    the helpless squatters who had disappeared. It was inside this circle that the ring of worshipers jumped and roared, the
                    general direction of the mass motion being from left to right in endless
                    bacchanale between the ring of bodies and the ring of fire.It may have been only imagination and it may have been only echoes which induced
                    one of the men, an excitable Spaniard, to fancy he heard antiphonal responses to
                    the ritual from some far and unillumined spot deeper within the wood of ancient
                    legendry and horror. This man, Joseph D. Galvez, I later met and questioned; and he proved distractingly imaginative. He indeed went so far as to hint of the faint beating of great wings, and of a
                    glimpse of shining eyes and a mountainous white bulk beyond the remotest
                    trees--but I suppose he had been hearing too much native superstition.Actually, the horrified pause of the men was of comparatively brief duration. Duty came first; and although there must have been nearly a hundred mongrel
                    celebrants in the throng, the police relied on their firearms and plunged
                    determinedly into the nauseous rout. For five minutes the resultant din and chaos were beyond description. Wild blows were struck, shots were fired, and escapes were made; but in the end
                    Legrasse was able to count some forty-seven sullen prisoners, whom he forced to
                    dress in haste and fall into line between two rows of policemen. Five of the worshipers lay dead, and two severely wounded ones were carried away
                    on improvised stretchers by their fellow-prisoners. The image on the monolith, of course, was carefully removed and carried back by
                    Legrasse.Examined at headquarters after a trip of intense strain and weariness, the
                    prisoners all proved to be men of a very low, mixed-blooded, and mentally
                    aberrant type. Most were seamen, and a sprinkling of negroes and mulattoes, largely West
                    Indians or Brava Portuguese from the Cape Verde Islands, gave a coloring of
                    voodooism to the heterogeneous cult. But before many questions were asked, it became manifest that something far
                    deeper and older than negro fetishism was involved. Degraded and ignorant as they were, the creatures held with surprizing
                    consistency to the central idea of their loathsome faith.They worshiped, so they said, the Great Old Ones who lived ages before there were
                    any men, and who came to the young world out of the sky. Those Old Ones were gone now, inside the earth and under the sea; but their dead
                    bodies had told their secrets in dreams to the first man, who formed a cult
                    which had never died. This was that cult, and the prisoners said it had always existed and always
                    would exist, hidden in distant wastes and dark places all over the world until
                    the time when the great priest Cthulhu, from his dark house in the mighty city
                    of R'lyeh under the waters, should rise and bring the earth again beneath his
                    sway. Some day he would call, when the stars were ready, and the secret cult would
                    always be waiting to liberate him.Meanwhile no more must be told. There was a secret which even torture
                    could not extract. Mankind was not absolutely alone among the conscious
                    things of earth, for shapes came out of the dark to visit the faithful
                    few. But these were not the Great Old Ones. No man had ever seen
                    the Old Ones. The carven idol was great Cthulhu, but none might say
                    whether or not the others were precisely like him. No one could read the
                    old writing now, but things were told by word of mouth. The chanted
                    ritual was not the secret--that was never spoken aloud, only whispered.Only two of the prisoners were found sane enough to be hanged, and the rest were
                    committed to various institutions. All denied a part in the ritual murders, and averred that the killing had been
                    done by Black-winged Ones which had come to them from their immemorial
                    meeting-place in the haunted wood. But of those mysterious allies no coherent account could ever be gained. What the police did extract came mainly from an immensely aged mestizo named
                    Castro, who claimed to have sailed to strange ports and talked with undying
                    leaders of the cult in the mountains of China.Old Castro remembered bits of hideous legend that paled the speculations of
                    theosophists and made man and the world seem recent and transient indeed. There had been eons when other Things ruled on the earth, and They had had great
                    cities. Remains of Them, he said the deathless Chinamen had told him, were still to be
                    found as Cyclopean stones on islands in the Pacific. They all died vast epochs of time before man came, but there were arts which
                    could revive Them when the stars had come round again to the right positions in
                    the cycle of eternity. They had, indeed, come themselves from the stars, and brought Their images with
                    Them.These Great Old Ones, Castro continued, were not composed altogether of flesh and
                    blood. They had shape--for did not this star-fashioned image prove it?--but that shape was not made of matter. When the stars were right, They could plunge from world to world through the
                    sky; but when the stars were wrong, They could not live. But although They no longer lived, They would never really die. They all lay in stone houses in Their great city of R'lyeh, preserved by the
                    spells of mighty Cthulhu for a glorious resurrection when the stars and the
                    earth might once more be ready for Them. But at that time some force from outside must serve to liberate Their
                    bodies. The spells that preserved Them intact likewise prevented Them from making an
                    initial move, and They could only lie awake in the dark and think whilst
                    uncounted millions of years rolled by. They knew all that was occurring in the universe, for Their mode of speech was
                    transmitted thought. Even now They talked in Their tombs. When, after infinities of chaos, the first men came, the Great Old Ones spoke to
                    the sensitive among them by molding their dreams; for only thus could Their
                    language reach the fleshly minds of mammals.Then, whispered Castro, those first men formed the cult around small idols which
                    the Great Ones showed them; idols brought in dim eras from dark stars. That cult would never die till the stars came right again, and the secret
                    priests would take great Cthulhu from His tomb to revive His subjects and resume
                    His rule of earth. The time would be easy to know, for then mankind would have become as the Great
                    Old Ones; free and wild and beyond good and evil, with laws and morals thrown
                    aside and all men shouting and killing and reveling in joy. Then the liberated Old Ones would teach them new ways to shout and kill and
                    revel and enjoy themselves, and all the earth would flame with a holocaust of
                    ecstasy and freedom. Meanwhile the cult, by appropriate rites, must keep alive the memory of those
                    ancient ways and shadow forth the prophecy of their return.In the elder time chosen men had talked with the entombed Old Ones in dreams,
                    but then something had happened. The great stone city R'lyeh, with its
                    monoliths and sepulchers, had sunk beneath the waves; and the deep waters, full
                    of the one primal mystery through which not even thought can pass, had cut off
                    the spectral intercourse. But memory never died, and high priests said
                    that the city would rise again when the stars were right. Then came out
                    of the earth the black spirits of earth, moldy and shadowy, and full of dim
                    rumors picked up in caverns beneath forgotten sea-bottoms. But of them
                    old Castro dared not speak much. He cut himself off hurriedly, and no
                    amount of persuasion or subtlety could elicit more in this direction. The
                    _size_ of the Old Ones, too, he curiously declined to mention. Of the
                    cult, he said that he thought the center lay amid the pathless deserts of
                    Arabia, where Irem, the City of Pillars, dreams hidden and untouched. It
                    was not allied to the European witch-cult, and was virtually unknown beyond its
                    members. No book had ever really hinted of it, though the deathless
                    Chinamen said that there were double meanings in the _Necronomicon_ of the mad
                    Arab Abdul Alhazred which the initiated might read as they chose, especially the
                    much-discussed couplet: Legrasse, deeply impressed and not a little bewildered, had inquired in vain
                    concerning the historic affiliations of the cult. Castro, apparently, had told the truth when he said that it was wholly
                    secret. The authorities at Tulane University could shed no light upon either cult or
                    image, and now the detective had come to the highest authorities in the country
                    and met with no more than the Greenland tale of Professor Webb.The feverish interest aroused at the meeting by Legrasse's tale, corroborated as
                    it was by the statuette, is echoed in the subsequent correspondence of those who
                    attended, although scant mention occurs in the formal publication of the
                    society. Caution is the first care of those accustomed to face occasional charlatanry and
                    imposture. Legrasse for some time lent the image to Professor Webb, but at the latter's
                    death it was returned to him and remains in his possession, where I viewed it
                    not long ago. It is truly a terrible thing, and unmistakably akin to the dream-sculpture of
                    young Wilcox.That my uncle was excited by the tale of the sculptor I did not wonder, for what
                    thoughts must arise upon hearing, after a knowledge of what Legrasse had learned
                    of the cult, of a sensitive young man who had _dreamed_ not only the figure and
                    exact hieroglyphics of the swamp-found image and the Greenland devil tablet, but
                    had come _in his dreams_ upon at least three of the precise words of the formula
                    uttered alike by Eskimo diabolists and mongrel Louisianans? Professor Angell's instant start on an investigation of the utmost thoroughness
                    was eminently natural; though privately I suspected young Wilcox of having heard
                    of the cult in some indirect way, and of having invented a series of dreams to
                    heighten and continue the mystery at my uncle's expense. The dream-narratives and cuttings collected by the professor were, of course,
                    strong corroboration; but the rationalism of my mind and the extravagance of the
                    whole subject led me to adopt what I thought the most sensible conclusions. So, after thoroughly studying the manuscript again and correlating the
                    theosophical and anthropological notes with the cult narrative of Legrasse, I
                    made a trip to Providence to see the sculptor and give him the rebuke I thought
                    proper for so boldly imposing upon a learned and aged man.Wilcox still lived alone in the Fleur-de-Lys Building in Thomas Street, a hideous
                    Victorian imitation of Seventeenth Century Breton architecture which flaunts its
                    stuccoed front amidst the lovely Colonial houses on the ancient hill, and under
                    the very shadow of the finest Georgian steeple in America. I found him at work in his rooms, and at once conceded from the specimens
                    scattered about that his genius is indeed profound and authentic. He will, I believe, be heard from sometime as one of the great decadents; for he
                    has crystallized in clay and will one day mirror in marble those nightmares and
                    fantasies which Arthur Machen evokes in prose, and Clark Ashton Smith makes
                    visible in verse and in painting.Dark, frail, and somewhat unkempt in aspect, he turned languidly at my knock and
                    asked me my business without rising. When I told him who I was, he displayed some interest; for my uncle had excited
                    his curiosity in probing his strange dreams, yet had never explained the reason
                    for the study. I did not enlarge his knowledge in this regard, but sought with some subtlety to
                    draw him out.In a short time I became convinced of his absolute sincerity, for he spoke of the
                    dreams in a manner none could mistake. They and their subconscious residuum had influenced his art profoundly, and he
                    showed me a morbid statue whose contours almost made me shake with the potency
                    of its black suggestion. He could not recall having seen the original of this thing except in his own
                    dream bas-relief, but the outlines had formed themselves insensibly under his
                    hands. It was, no doubt, the giant shape he had raved of in delirium. That he really knew nothing of the hidden cult, save from what my uncle's
                    relentless catechism had let fall, he soon made clear; and again I strove to
                    think of some way in which he could possibly have received the weird
                    impressions.He talked of his dreams in a strangely poetic fashion; making me see with
                    terrible vividness the damp Cyclopean city of slimy green stone--whose
                    _geometry_, he oddly said, was _all wrong_--and hear with frightened expectancy
                    the ceaseless, half-mental calling from underground: "_Cthulhu
                        fhtagn_,
                    "_Cthulhu fhtagn_."These words had formed part of that dread ritual which told of dead Cthulhu's
                    dream-vigil in his stone vault at R'lyeh, and I felt deeply moved despite my
                    rational beliefs. Wilcox, I was sure, had heard of the cult in some casual way, and had soon
                    forgotten it amidst the mass of his equally weird reading and imagining. Later, by virtue of its sheer impressiveness, it had found subconscious
                    expression in dreams, in the bas-relief, and in the terrible statue I now
                    beheld; so that his imposture upon my uncle had been a very innocent one. The youth was of a type, at once slightly affected and slightly ill-mannered,
                    which I could never like; but I was willing enough now to admit both his genius
                    and his honesty. I took leave of him amicably, and wish him all the success his talent
                    promises.The matter of the cult still remained to fascinate me, and at times I had visions
                    of personal fame from researches into its origin and connections. I visited New Orleans, talked with Legrasse and others of that old-time
                    raiding-party, saw the frightful image, and even questioned such of the mongrel
                    prisoners as still survived. Old Castro, unfortunately, had been dead for some years. What I now heard so graphically at first hand, though it was really no more than
                    a detailed confirmation of what my uncle had written, excited me afresh; for I
                    felt sure that I was on the track of a very real, very secret, and very ancient
                    religion whose discovery would make me an anthropologist of note. My attitude was still one of absolute materialism, _as I wish it still were_,
                    and I discounted with almost inexplicable perversity the coincidence of the
                    dream notes and odd cuttings collected by Professor Angell.One thing which I began to suspect, and which I now fear I _know_, is that my
                    uncle's death was far from natural. He fell on a narrow hill street leading up from an ancient waterfront swarming
                    with foreign mongrels, after a careless push from a negro sailor. I did not forget the mixed blood and marine pursuits of the cult-members in
                    Louisiana, and would not be surprized to learn of secret methods and poison
                    needles as ruthless and as anciently known as the cryptic rites and beliefs. Legrasse and his men, it is true, have been let alone; but in Norway a certain
                    seaman who saw things is dead. Might not the deeper inquiries of my uncle after encountering the sculptor's
                    data have come to sinister ears? I think Professor Angell died because he knew too much, or because he was likely
                    to learn too much. Whether I shall go as he did remains to be seen, for I have learned much
                    now. _3. The Madness from the Sea.If heaven ever wishes to grant me a boon, it will be a total effacing of the
                    results of a mere chance which fixed my eye on a certain stray piece of
                    shelf-paper. It was nothing on which I would naturally have stumbled in the course of my
                    daily round, for it was an old number of an Australian journal, _Sydney
                    Bulletin_ for April 18, 1925. It had escaped even the cutting bureau which had at the time of its issuance
                    been avidly collecting material for my uncle's research.I had largely given over my inquiries into what Professor Angell called the
                        "Cthulhu Cult," and was visiting a learned friend of
                    Paterson, New Jersey, the curator of a local museum and a mineralogist of
                    note. Examining one day the reserve specimens roughly set on the storage
                    shelves in a rear room of the museum, my eye was caught by an odd picture in one
                    of the old papers spread beneath the stones. It was the _Sydney Bulletin_
                    I have mentioned, for my friend has wide affiliations in all conceivable foreign
                    parts; and the picture was a half-tone cut of a hideous stone image almost
                    identical with that which Legrasse had found in the swamp.Eagerly clearing the sheet of its precious contents, I scanned the item in
                    detail; and was disappointed to find it of only moderate length. What it suggested, however, was of portentous significance to my flagging quest;
                    and I carefully tore it out for immediate action. It read as follows:
                 _Vigilant_ Arrives With Helpless Armed New Zealand Yacht in Tow. One Survivor and Dead Man Found Aboard. Tale of Desperate Battle and Deaths at Sea. Rescued Seaman Refuses Particulars of Strange Experience. Odd Idol Found in His Possession. Inquiry to Follow. The Morrison Co.'s freighter _Vigilant_, bound from Valparaiso, arrived this morning at its wharf
                    in Darling Harbour, having in tow the battled and disabled but heavily armed
                    steam yacht _Alert_ of Dunedin, N. Z., which was sighted April 12th in S. Latitude 34° 21', W. Longitude 152° 17', with one living and one dead man aboard. The _Vigilant_ left Valparaiso March 25th, and on April 2d was driven
                    considerably south of her course by exceptionally heavy storms and monster
                    waves. On April 12th the derelict was sighted; and though apparently deserted, was
                    found upon boarding to contain one survivor in a half-delirious condition and
                    one man who had evidently been dead for more than a week. The living man was clutching a horrible stone idol of unknown origin, about a
                    foot in height, regarding whose nature authorities at Sydney University, the
                    Royal Society, and the Museum in College Street all profess complete bafflement,
                    and which the survivor says he found in the cabin of the yacht, in a small
                    carved shrine of common pattern. This man, after recovering his senses, told an exceedingly strange story of
                    piracy and slaughter. He is Gustaf Johansen, a Norwegian of some intelligence, and had been second
                    mate of the two-masted schooner _Emma_ of Auckland, which sailed for Callao
                    February 20th, with a complement of eleven men. The _Emma_, he says, was delayed and thrown widely south of her course by the
                    great storm of March 1st, and on March 22d, in S. Latitude 49° 51´, W. Longitude 128° 34´, encountered the _Alert_, manned by a queer and evil-looking
                    crew of Kanakas and half-castes. Being ordered peremptorily to turn back, Capt. Collins refused; whereupon the strange crew began to fire savagely and without
                    warning upon the schooner with a peculiarly heavy battery of brass cannon
                    forming part of the yacht's equipment. The _Emma's_ men showed fight, says the survivor, and though the schooner began
                    to sink from shots beneath the waterline they managed to heave alongside their
                    enemy and board her, grappling with the savage crew on the yacht's deck, and
                    being forced to kill them all, the number being slightly superior, because of
                    their particularly abhorrent and desperate though rather clumsy mode of
                    fighting. Three of the _Emma's_ men, including Capt. Collins and First Mate Green, were killed; and the remaining eight under Second
                    Mate Johansen proceeded to navigate the captured yacht, going ahead in their
                    original direction to see if any reason for their ordering back had existed. The next day, it appears, they raised and landed on a small island, although
                    none is known to exist in that part of the ocean; and six of the men somehow
                    died ashore, though Johansen is queerly reticent about this part of his story
                    and speaks only of their falling into a rock chasm. Later, it seems, he and one companion boarded the yacht and tried to manage her,
                    but were beaten about by the storm of April 2nd. From that time till his rescue on the 12th, the man remembers little, and he
                    does not even recall when William Briden, his companion, died. Briden's death reveals no apparent cause, and was probably due to excitement or
                    exposure. Cable advices from Dunedin report that the _Alert_ was well known there as an
                    island trader, and bore an evil reputation along the waterfront. It was owned by a curious group of half-castes whose frequent meetings and night
                    trips to the woods attracted no little curiosity; and it had set sail in great
                    haste just after the storm and earth tremors of March 1st. Our Auckland correspondent gives the _Emma_ and her crew an excellent
                    reputation, and Johansen is described as a sober and worthy man. The admiralty will institute an inquiry on the whole matter beginning tomorrow,
                    at which every effort will be made to induce Johansen to speak more freely than
                    he has done hitherto.This was all, together with the picture of the hellish image; but what a train of
                    ideas it started in my mind! Here were new treasuries of data on the Cthulhu Cult, and evidence that it had
                    strange interests at sea as well as on land. What motive prompted the hybrid crew to order back the _Emma_ as they sailed
                    about with their hideous idol? What was the unknown island on which six of the _Emma's_ crew had died, and
                    about which the mate Johansen was so secretive? What had the vice-admiralty's investigation brought out, and what was known of
                    the noxious cult in Dunedin? And most marvelous of all, what deep and more than natural linkage of dates was
                    this which gave a malign and now undeniable significance to the various turns of
                    events so carefully noted by my uncle?March 1st--our February 28th according to the International Date Line--the
                    earthquake and storm had come. From Dunedin the _Alert_ and her noisome crew had darted eagerly forth as if
                    imperiously summoned, and on the other side of the earth poets and artists had
                    begun to dream of a strange, dank Cyclopean city whilst a young sculptor had
                    molded in his sleep the form of the dreaded Cthulhu. March 23rd the crew of the _Emma_ landed on an unknown island and left six men
                    dead; and on that date the dreams of sensitive men assumed a heightened
                    vividness and darkened with dread of a giant monster's malign pursuit, whilst an
                    architect had gone mad and a sculptor had lapsed suddenly into delirium! And what of this storm of April 2nd--the date on which all dreams of the dank
                    city ceased, and Wilcox emerged unharmed from the bondage of strange fever? What of all this--and of those hints of old Castro about the sunken, star-born
                    Old Ones and their coming reign; their faithful cult _and their mastery of
                    dreams_? Was I tottering on the brink of cosmic horrors beyond man's power to bear? If so, they must be horrors of the mind alone, for in some way the second of
                    April had put a stop to whatever monstrous menace had begun its siege of
                    mankind's soul.That evening, after a day of hurried cabling and arranging, I bade my host adieu
                    and took a train for San Francisco. In less than a month I was in Dunedin; where, however, I found that little was
                    known of the strange cult-members who had lingered in the old sea taverns. Waterfront scum was far too common for special mention; though there was vague
                    talk about one inland trip these mongrels had made, during which faint drumming
                    and red flame were noted on the distant hills.In Auckland I learned that Johansen had returned _with yellow hair turned white_
                    after a perfunctory and inconclusive questioning at Sydney, and had thereafter
                    sold his cottage in West Street and sailed with his wife to his old home in
                    Oslo. Of his stirring experience he would tell his friends no more than he had told
                    the admiralty officials, and all they could do was to give me his Oslo
                    address.After that I went to Sydney and talked profitlessly with seamen and members of
                    the vice-admiralty court. I saw the _Alert_, now sold and in commercial
                    use, at Circular Quay in Sydney Cove, but gained nothing from its non-committal
                    bulk. The crouching image with its cuttlefish head, dragon body, scaly
                    wings, and hieroglyphed pedestal, was preserved in the Museum at Hyde Park; and
                    I studied it long and well, finding it a thing of balefully exquisite
                    workmanship, and with the same utter mystery, terrible antiquity, and unearthly
                    strangeness of material which I had noted in Legrasse's smaller specimen.
                    Geologists, the curator told me, had found it a monstrous puzzle; for they vowed
                    that the world held no rock like it. Then I thought with a shudder of
                    what old Castro had told Legrasse about the primal Great Ones: "They had
                        come from the stars, and had brought Their images with Them."Shaken with such a mental revolution as I had never before known, I now resolved
                    to visit Mate Johansen in Oslo. Sailing for London, I re-embarked at once for the Norwegian capital; and one
                    autumn day landed at the trim wharves in the shadow of the Egeberg.Johansen's address, I discovered, lay in the Old Town of King Harold Haardrada,
                    which kept alive the name of Oslo during all the centuries that the greater city
                    masqueraded as "Christiania."
                I made the brief trip by taxicab, and knocked with palpitant heart at the
                    door of a neat and ancient building with plastered front. A sad-faced
                    woman in black answered my summons, and I was stung with disappointment when she
                    told me in halting English that Gustaf Johansen was no more.He had not long survived his return, said his wife, for the doings at sea in
                    1925 had broken him. He had told her no more than he had told the public,
                    but had left a long manuscript--of "technical matters" as he
                    said--written in English, evidently in order to safeguard her from the peril of
                    casual perusal. During a walk through a narrow lane near the Gothenburg
                    dock, a bundle of papers falling from an attic window had knocked him
                    down. Two Lascar sailors at once helped him to his feet, but before the
                    ambulance could reach him he was dead. Physicians found no adequate cause
                    for the end, and laid it to heart trouble and a weakened constitution.I now felt gnawing at my vitals that dark terror which will never leave me till
                    I, too, am at rest; "accidentally" or otherwise.
                    Persuading the widow that my connection with her husband's "technical
                        matters" was sufficient to entitle me to his manuscript, I bore the
                    document away and began to read it on the London boat. It was a simple, rambling thing--a naive sailor's effort at a post-facto
                    diary--and strove to recall day by day that last awful voyage. I can not attempt to transcribe it verbatim in all its cloudiness and
                    redundance, but I will tell its gist enough to show why the sound of the water
                    against the vessel's sides became so unendurable to me that I stopped my ears
                    with cotton.Johansen, thank God, did not know quite all, even though he saw the city and the
                    Thing, but I shall never sleep calmly again when I think of the horrors that
                    lurk ceaselessly behind life in time and in space, and of those unhallowed
                    blasphemies from elder stars which dream beneath the sea, known and favored by a
                    nightmare cult ready and eager to loose them on the world whenever another
                    earthquake shall heave their monstrous stone city again to the sun and air.Johansen's voyage had begun just as he told it to the vice-admiralty. The _Emma_, in ballast, had cleared Auckland on February 20th, and had felt the
                    full force of that earthquake-born tempest which must have heaved up from the
                    sea-bottom the horrors that filled men's dreams. Once more under control, the ship was making good progress when held up by the
                    _Alert_ on March 22nd, and I could feel the mate's regret as he wrote of her
                    bombardment and sinking. Of the swarthy cult-fiends on the _Alert_ he speaks with significant horror. There was some peculiarly abominable quality about them which made their
                    destruction seem almost a duty, and Johansen shows ingenuous wonder at the
                    charge of ruthlessness brought against his party during the proceedings of the
                    court of inquiry. Then, driven ahead by curiosity in their captured yacht under Johansen's
                    command, the men sight a great stone pillar sticking out of the sea, and in
                    S. Latitude 47° 9', W. Longitude 126° 43' come upon a coastline of mingled mud, ooze, and weedy
                    Cyclopean masonry which can be nothing less than the tangible substance of
                    earth's supreme terror--the nightmare corpse-city of R'lyeh, that was built in
                    measureless eons behind history by the vast, loathsome shapes that seeped down
                    from the dark stars. There lay great Cthulhu and his hordes, hidden in green slimy vaults and sending
                    out at last, after cycles incalculable, the thoughts that spread fear to the
                    dreams of the sensitive and called imperiously to the faithful to come on a
                    pilgrimage of liberation and restoration. All this Johansen did not suspect, but God knows he soon saw enough!I suppose that only a single mountain-top, the hideous monolith-crowned citadel
                    whereon great Cthulhu was buried, actually emerged from the waters. When I think of the _extent_ of all that may be brooding down there I almost
                    wish to kill myself forthwith. Johansen and his men were awed by the cosmic majesty of this dripping Babylon of
                    elder demons, and must have guessed without guidance that it was nothing of this
                    or of any sane planet. Awe at the unbelievable size of the greenish stone blocks, at the dizzying
                    height of the great carven monolith, and at the stupefying identity of the
                    colossal statues and bas-reliefs with the queer image found in the shrine on the
                    _Alert_, is poignantly visible in every line of the mate's frightened
                    description.Without knowing what futurism is like, Johansen achieved something very close to
                    it when he spoke of the city; for instead of describing any definite structure
                    or building, he dwells only on the broad impressions of vast angles and stone
                    surfaces--surfaces too great to belong to anything right or proper for this
                    earth, and impious with horrible images and hieroglyphs. I mention his talk about _angles_ because it suggests something Wilcox had told
                    me of his awful dreams. He had said that the _geometry_ of the dream-place he saw was abnormal,
                    non-Euclidean, and loathsomely redolent of spheres and dimensions apart from
                    ours. Now an unlettered seaman felt the same thing whilst gazing at the terrible
                    reality.Johansen and his men landed at a sloping mud-bank on this monstrous Acropolis,
                    and clambered slipperily up over titan oozy blocks which could have been no
                    mortal staircase. The very sun of heaven seemed distorted when viewed through the polarizing
                    miasma welling out from this sea-soaked perversion, and twisted menace and
                    suspense lurked leeringly in those crazily elusive angles of carven rock where a
                    second glance showed concavity after the first showed convexity.Something very like fright had come over all the explorers before anything more
                    definite than rock and ooze and weed was seen. Each would have fled had he not feared the scorn of the others, and it was only
                    half-heartedly that they searched--vainly, as it proved--for some portable
                    souvenir to bear away.It was Rodriguez the Portuguese who climbed up the foot of the monolith and
                    shouted of what he had found. The rest followed him, and looked curiously at the immense carved door with the
                    now familiar squid-dragon bas-relief. It was, Johansen said, like a great barn-door; and they all felt that it was a
                    door because of the ornate lintel, threshold, and jambs around it, though they
                    could not decide whether it lay flat like a trap-door or slantwise like an
                    outside cellar-door. As Wilcox would have said, the geometry of the place was all wrong. One could not be sure that the sea and the ground were horizontal, hence the
                    relative position of everything else seemed fantasmally variable.Briden pushed at the stone in several places without result. Then Donovan felt over it delicately around the edge, pressing each point
                    separately as he went. He climbed interminably along the grotesque stone molding--that is, one would
                    call it climbing if the thing was not after all horizontal--and the men wondered
                    how any door in the universe could be so vast. Then, very softly and slowly, the acre-great panel began to give inward at the
                    top; and they saw that it was balanced.Donovan slid or somehow propelled himself down or along the jamb and rejoined his
                    fellows, and everyone watched the queer recession of the monstrously carven
                    portal. In this fantasy of prismatic distortion it moved anomalously in a diagonal way,
                    so that all the rules of matter and perspective seemed upset.The aperture was black with a darkness almost material. That tenebrousness was indeed a _positive quality_; for it obscured such parts
                    of the inner walls as ought to have been revealed, and actually burst forth like
                    smoke from its eon-long imprisonment, visibly darkening the sun as it slunk away
                    into the shrunken and gibbous sky on flapping membranous wings. The odor arising from the newly opened depths was intolerable, and at length the
                    quick-eared Hawkins thought he heard a nasty, slopping sound down there. Everyone listened, and everyone was listening still when It lumbered
                    slobberingly into sight and gropingly squeezed Its gelatinous green immensity
                    through the black doorway into the tainted outside air of that poison city of
                    madness.Poor Johansen's handwriting almost gave out when he wrote of this. Of the six men who never reached the ship, he thinks two perished of pure fright
                    in that accursed instant. The Thing can not be described--there is no language for such abysms of
                    shrieking and immemorial lunacy, such eldritch contradictions of all matter,
                    force, and cosmic order. A mountain walked or stumbled. God! What wonder that across the earth a great architect went mad, and poor Wilcox
                    raved with fever in that telepathic instant? The Thing of the idols, the green, sticky spawn of the stars, had awaked to
                    claim his own. The stars were right again, and what an age-old cult had failed to do by design,
                    a band of innocent sailors had done by accident. After vigintillions of years great Cthulhu was loose again, and ravening for
                    delight.Three men were swept up by the flabby claws before anybody turned. God rest them, if there be any rest in the universe. They were Donovan, Guerrera and Angstrom. Parker slipped as the other three were plunging frenziedly over endless vistas
                    of green-crusted rock to the boat, and Johansen swears he was swallowed up by an
                    angle of masonry which shouldn't have been there; an angle which was acute, but
                    behaved as if it were obtuse. So only Briden and Johansen reached the boat, and pulled desperately for the
                    _Alert_ as the mountainous monstrosity flopped down the slimy stones and
                    hesitated floundering at the edge of the water.Steam had not been suffered to go down entirely, despite the departure of all
                    hands for the shore; and it was the work of only a few moments of feverish
                    rushing up and down between wheels and engines to get the _Alert_ under way. Slowly, amidst the distorted horrors of that indescribable scene, she began to
                    churn the lethal waters; whilst on the masonry of that charnel shore that was
                    not of earth the titan Thing from the stars slavered and gibbered like Polypheme
                    cursing the fleeing ship of Odysseus. Then, bolder than the storied Cyclops, great Cthulhu slid greasily into the
                    water and began to pursue with vast wave-raising strokes of cosmic potency. Briden looked back and went mad, laughing shrilly as he kept on laughing at
                    intervals till death found him one night in the cabin whilst Johansen was
                    wandering deliriously.But Johansen had not given out yet. Knowing that the Thing could surely overtake the _Alert_ until steam was fully
                    up, he resolved on a desperate chance; and, setting the engine for full speed,
                    ran lightning-like on deck and reversed the wheel. There was a mighty eddying and foaming in the noisome brine, and as the steam
                    mounted higher and higher the brave Norwegian drove his vessel head on against
                    the pursuing jelly which rose above the unclean froth like the stern of a demon
                    galleon. The awful squid-head with writhing feelers came nearly up to the bowsprit of the
                    sturdy yacht, but Johansen drove on relentlessly.There was a bursting as of an exploding bladder, a slushy nastiness as of a
                    cloven sunfish, a stench as of a thousand opened graves, and a sound that the
                    chronicler would not put on paper. For an instant the ship was befouled by an acrid and blinding green cloud, and
                    then there was only a venomous seething astern; where--God in heaven!--the scattered plasticity of that nameless sky-spawn was nebulously
                    _recombining_ in its hateful original form, whilst its distance widened every
                    second as the _Alert_ gained impetus from its mounting steam.That was all. After that Johansen only brooded over the idol in the cabin and attended to a
                    few matters of food for himself and the laughing maniac by his side. He did not try to navigate after the first bold flight, for the reaction had
                    taken something out of his soul. Then came the storm of April 2nd, and a gathering of the clouds about his
                    consciousness. There is a sense of spectral whirling through liquid gulfs of infinity, of
                    dizzying rides through reeling universes on a comet's tail, and of hysterical
                    plunges from the pit to the moon and from the moon back again to the pit, all
                    livened by a cachinnating chorus of the distorted, hilarious elder gods and the
                    green, bat-winged mocking imps of Tartarus.Out of that dream came rescue--the _Vigilant_, the vice-admiralty court, the
                    streets of Dunedin, and the long voyage back home to the old house by the
                    Egeberg. He could not tell--they would think him mad. He would write of what he knew before death came, but his wife must not
                    guess. Death would be a boon if only it could blot out the memories.That was the document I read, and now I have placed it in the tin box beside the
                    bas-relief and the papers of Professor Angell. With it shall go this record of mine--this test of my own sanity, wherein is
                    pieced together that which I hope may never be pieced together again. I have looked upon all that the universe has to hold of horror, and even the
                    skies of spring and the flowers of summer must ever afterward be poison to
                    me. But I do not think my life will be long. As my uncle went, as poor Johansen went, so I shall go. I know too much, and the cult still lives.Cthulhu still lives, too, I suppose, again in that chasm of stone which has
                    shielded him since the sun was young. His accursed city is sunken once more, for the _Vigilant_ sailed over the spot
                    after the April storm; but his ministers on earth still bellow and prance and
                    slay around idol-capped monoliths in lonely places. He must have been trapped by the sinking whilst within his black abyss, or else
                    the world would by now be screaming with fright and frenzy. Who knows the end? What has risen may sink, and what has sunk may rise. Loathsomeness waits and dreams in the deep, and decay spreads over the tottering
                    cities of men. A time will come--but I must not and can not think! Let me pray that, if I do not survive this manuscript, my executors may put
                    caution before audacity and see that it meets no other eye.During the winter of 1927-28 Federal government officials made a strange and
                    secret investigation of certain conditions in the ancient Massachusetts seaport
                    of Innsmouth. The public first learned of it in February, when a vast series of raids and
                    arrests occurred, followed by the deliberate burning and dynamiting--under
                    suitable precautions--of an enormous number of crumbling, worm-eaten, and
                    supposedly empty houses along the abandoned waterfront. Uninquiring souls let this occurrence pass as one of the major clashes in a
                    spasmodic war on liquor.Keener news-followers, however, wondered at the prodigious number of arrests, the
                    abnormally large force of men used in making them, and the secrecy surrounding
                    the disposal of the prisoners. No trials, or even definite charges, were reported; nor were any of the captives
                    seen thereafter in the regular jails of the nation. There were vague statements about disease and concentration camps, and later
                    about dispersal in various naval and military prisons, but nothing positive ever
                    developed.Complaints from many liberal organizations were met with long confidential
                    discussions, and representatives were taken on trips to certain camps and
                    prisons. As a result, these societies became surprisingly passive and reticent. Newspaper men were harder to manage, but seemed largely to cooperate with the
                    government in the end. Only one paper--a tabloid always discounted because of its wild
                    policy--mentioned the deep-diving submarine that discharged torpedoes downward
                    in the marine abyss just beyond Devil Reef. That item, gathered by chance in a haunt of sailors, seemed indeed rather
                    far-fetched; since the low, black reef lies a full mile and a half out from
                    Innsmouth Harbor.But at last I am going to defy the ban on speech about this thing. Results, I am certain, are so thorough that no public harm save a shock of
                    repulsion could ever accrue from a hinting of what was found by those horrified
                    raiders at Innsmouth. For my contact with this affair has been closer than that of any other layman,
                    and I have carried away impressions which are yet to drive me to drastic
                    measures.It was I who fled frantically out of Innsmouth in the early morning hours of July
                    16, 1927, and whose frightened appeals for government inquiry and action brought
                    on the whole reported episode. I was willing enough to stay mute while the affair was fresh and uncertain; but
                    now that it is an old story, with public interest and curiosity gone, I have an
                    odd craving to whisper about those few frightful hours in that ill-rumored and
                    evilly-shadowed seaport of death and blasphemous abnormality.I never heard of Innsmouth till the day before I saw it for the first and--so
                    far--last time. I was celebrating my coming of age by a tour of New England--sightseeing,
                    antiquarian, and genealogical--and had planned to go directly from ancient
                    Newburyport to Arkham, whence my mother's family was derived. I had no car, but was traveling by train, trolley, and motor-coach, always
                    seeking the cheapest possible route. In Newburyport they told me that the steam train was the thing to take to
                    Arkham; and it was only at the station ticket-office, when I demurred at the
                    high fare, that I learned about Innsmouth. The stout, shrewd-faced agent, whose speech showed him to be no local man,
                    seemed sympathetic toward my efforts at economy, and made a suggestion that none
                    of my other informants had offered.That was the first I ever heard of shadowed Innsmouth. Any reference to a town not shown on common maps or listed in recent guidebooks
                    would have interested me, and the agent's old manner of allusion roused
                    something like real curiosity. So I asked the agent to tell me something about it.He was very deliberate, and spoke with an air of feeling slightly superior to
                    what he said.And so I spent part of that evening at the Newburyport Public Library looking up
                    data about Innsmouth. The Essex County histories on the library shelves had very little to say, except
                    that the town was founded in 1643, noted for shipbuilding before the Revolution,
                    a seat of great marine prosperity in the early 19th century, and later a minor
                    factory center using the Manuxet as power. The epidemic and riots of 1846 were very sparsely treated, as if they formed a
                    discredit to the country.References to decline were few, though the significance of the later record was
                    unmistakable. After the Civil War all industrial life was confined to the Marsh Refining
                    Company, and the marketing of gold ingots formed the only remaining bit of major
                    commerce aside from the eternal fishing.Most interesting of all was a glancing reference to the strange jewelry vaguely
                    associated with Innsmouth. It had evidently impressed the whole countryside more than a little, for mention
                    was made of specimens in the museum of Miskatonic University at Arkham, and in
                    the display room of the Newburyport Historical Society. I resolved to see the local sample--said to be a large, queerly-proportioned
                    thing evidently meant for a tiara--if it could possibly be arranged.The librarian gave me a note of introduction to the curator of the Society, a
                    Miss Anna Tilton, who lived nearby, and after a brief explanation that ancient
                    gentlewoman was kind enough to pilot me into the closed building, since the hour
                    was not outrageously late. The collection was a notable one indeed, but in my present mood I had eyes for
                    nothing but the bizarre object which glistened in a corner cupboard under the
                    electric lights.It took no excessive sensitiveness to beauty to make me literally gasp at the
                    strange, unearthly splendor of the alien, opulent phantasy that rested there on
                    a purple velvet cushion. The longer I looked, the more the thing fascinated me; and in this fascination
                    there was a curiously disturbing element hardly to be classified or accounted
                    for. I decided that it was the queer other-worldly quality of the art which made me
                    uneasy. It was as if the workmanship were that of another planet.The patterns all hinted of remote secrets and unimaginable abysses in time and
                    space, and the monotonously aquatic nature of the reliefs became almost
                    sinister. Among these reliefs were fabulous monsters of abhorrent grotesqueness and
                    malignity--wholly primal and awesomely ancestral.At times I fancied that every contour of these blasphemous fish-frogs was
                    overflowing with the ultimate quintessence of unknown and inhuman evil.In odd contrast to the tiara's aspect was its brief and prosy history as related
                    by Miss Tilton. It had been pawned for a ridiculous sum at a shop in State Street in 1873, by a
                    drunken Innsmouth man shortly afterward killed in a brawl.Miss Tilton was inclined to believe that it formed part of some exotic pirate
                    hoard discovered by old Captain Obed Marsh. This view was surely not weakened by the insistent offers of purchase at a high
                    price which the Marshes began to make as soon as they knew of its presence, and
                    which they repeated to this day despite the Society's unvarying determination
                    not to sell.As the good lady showed me out of the building, she assured me that the rumors of
                    devil-worship were partly justified by a peculiar secret cult which had gained
                    force there and engulfed all the orthodox churches.Shortly before ten the next morning I stood with my one small valise in front
                    of Hammond's Drug Store in old Market Square waiting for the Innsmouth
                    bus. In a few moments a small motor-coach of extreme decrepitude and
                    dirty gray color rattled down State Street, made a turn, and drew up at the curb
                    beside me.There were only three passengers--dark, unkempt men of sullen visage and somewhat
                    youthful cast--and when the vehicle stopped they clumsily shambled out and began
                    walking up State Street in a silent, almost furtive fashion. The driver also alighted. This, I reflected, must be the Joe Sargent mentioned by the ticket-agent; and
                    even before I had noticed any details there spread over me a wave of spontaneous
                    aversion which could be neither checked nor explained.He was a thin, stoop-shouldered man not much under six feet tall, dressed in
                    shabby blue civilian clothes and wearing a frayed gray golf cap. His age was perhaps thirty-five, but the odd, deep creases in the sides of his
                    neck made him seem older when one did not study his dull, expressionless
                    face. He had a narrow head, bulging, watery blue eyes that seemed never to wink, a
                    flat nose, a receding forehead and chin, and singularly undeveloped ears. As he walked toward the bus I observed his peculiarly shambling gait and saw
                    that his feet were inordinately immense. The more I studied them the more I wondered how he could buy any shoes to fit
                    them.A certain greasiness about the fellow increased my dislike. He was evidently given to working or lounging around the fish docks, and carried
                    with him much of their characteristic smell. Just what foreign blood was in him I could not even guess.I was sorry when I saw that there would be no other passengers on the
                    bus. Somehow I did not like the idea of riding alone with this
                    driver.At length the decrepit vehicle started with a jerk, and rattled noisily past the
                    old brick buildings of State Street amidst a cloud of vapor from the
                    exhaust.The day was warm and sunny, but the landscape of sand, sedge-grass, and stunted
                    shrubbery became more and more desolate as we proceeded. Out the window I could see the blue water and the sandy line of Plum Island, and
                    we presently drew very near the beach as our narrow road veered off from the
                    main highway to Rowley and Ipswich.At last we lost sight of Plum Island and saw the vast expanse of the open
                    Atlantic on our left. Our narrow course began to climb steeply, and I felt a singular sense of
                    disquiet in looking at the lonely crest ahead where the rutted roadway met the
                    sky. It was as if the bus were about to keep on its ascent leaving the sane earth
                    altogether and merging with the unknown arcana of upper air and cryptical
                    sky. The smell of the sea took on ominous implications, and the silent driver's bent,
                    rigid back and narrow head became more and more hateful. As I looked at him I saw that the back of his head was almost as hairless as his
                    face, having only a few straggling yellow strands upon a gray scabrous
                    surface.Then we reached the crest and beheld the outspread valley beyond, where the
                    Manuxet joins the sea just north of the long line of cliffs that culminate in
                    Kingsport Head; all my attention was captured by the nearer panorama just below
                    me. I had, I realized, come face to face with rumor-shadowed Innsmouth.It was a town of wide extent and dense construction, yet one with a portentous
                    dearth of visible life. The vast huddle of sagging gambrel roofs and peaked gables conveyed with
                    offensive clearness the idea of wormy decay, and as we approached along the now
                    descending road I could see that many roofs had wholly caved in. Stretching inland I saw the rusted, grass-grown line of the abandoned railway,
                    with leaning telegraph-poles now devoid of wires.Here and there the ruins of wharves jutted out from the shore to end in
                    indeterminate rottenness, those farthest south seeming the most decayed. And far out at sea, despite a high tide, I glimpsed a long, black line scarcely
                    rising above the water yet carrying a suggestion of odd latent malignancy. This, I knew, must be Devil Reef. As I looked, a subtle, curious sense of beckoning seemed superadded to the grim
                    repulsion; and oddly enough, I found this overtone more disturbing than the
                    primary impression.As the bus reached a lower level I began to catch the steady note of a waterfall
                    through the unnatural stillness. The leaning, unpainted houses grew thicker, lined both sides of the road, and
                    displayed more urban tendencies than did those we were leaving behind. The panorama ahead had contracted to a street scene, and in spots I could see
                    where a cobblestone pavement and stretches of brick sidewalk had formerly
                    existed. All the houses were apparently deserted, and there were occasional gaps where
                    tumbledown chimneys and cellar walls told of buildings that had collapsed. Pervading everything was the most nauseous fishy odor imaginable.And I was not to reach my destination without one other very strong impression
                    of poignantly disagreeable quality. The bus had come to a sort of open
                    concourse or radial point with churches on two sides and the bedraggled remains
                    of a circular green in the center, and I was looking at a large pillared hall on
                    the right-hand junction ahead.The door of the church basement was open, revealing a rectangle of blackness
                    inside. And as I looked, a certain object crossed or seemed to cross that dark
                    rectangle; burning into my brain a momentary conception of nightmare which was
                    all the more maddening because analysis could not show a single nightmarish
                    quality in it.It was a living object--the first except the driver that I had seen since
                    entering the compact part of the town--and had I been in a steadier mood I would
                    have found nothing whatever of terror in it. Clearly, as I realized a moment later, it was the pastor; clad in some peculiar
                    vestments doubtless introduced since the Order of Dagon had modified the ritual
                    of the local churches. The thing which had probably caught my first subconscious glance and supplied
                    the touch of bizarre horror was the tall tiara he wore; an almost exact
                    duplicate of the one Miss Tilton had shown me the previous evening. This, acting on my imagination, had supplied namelessly sinister qualities to
                    the indeterminate face and robed, shambling form beneath it.A very thin sprinkling of repellent-looking youngish people now became visible on
                    the sidewalks--lone individuals, and silent knots of two or three. The lower floors of the crumbling houses sometimes harbored small shops with
                    dingy signs, and I noticed a parked truck or two as we rattled along. The sound of waterfalls became more and more distinct, and presently I saw a
                    fairly deep river-gorge ahead, spanned by a wide, iron-railed highway bridge
                    beyond which a large square opened out. Then we rolled into the large semicircular square across the river and drew up
                    on the right-hand side in front of a tall, cupola-crowned building with remnants
                    of yellow paint and with a half-effaced sign proclaiming it to be the Gilman
                    House.I was glad to get out of that bus, and at once proceeded to check my valise in
                    the shabby hotel lobby.For some reason or other I chose to make my first inquiries at the chain grocery,
                    whose personnel was not likely to be native to Innsmouth. I found a solitary boy of about seventeen in charge, and was pleased to note the
                    brightness and affability which promised cheerful information. He seemed exceptionally eager to talk, and I soon gathered that he did not like
                    the place, its fishy smell, or its furtive people. His family did not like him to work in Innsmouth, but the chain had transferred
                    him there and he did not wish to give up his job.There was, he said, no public library or chamber of commerce in Innsmouth, but I
                    could probably find my way about. The street I had come down was Federal. West of that were the fine old residence streets--Broad, Washington, Lafayette,
                    and Adams--and east of it were the shoreward slums.Certain spots were almost forbidden territory, as he had learned at considerable
                    cost. One must not, for example, linger much around the Marsh refinery, or around any
                    of the still used churches, or around the pillared Order of Dagon Hall at New
                    Church Green. Those churches were very odd--all violently disavowed by their respective
                    denominations elsewhere, and apparently using the queerest kind of ceremonials
                    and clerical vestments.As for the Innsmouth people--the youth hardly knew what to make of them. Their appearance--especially those staring, unwinking eyes which one never saw
                    shut--was certainly shocking enough--and their voices were disgusting. It was awful to hear them chanting in their churches at night, and especially
                    during their main festivals or revivals, which fell twice a year on April 30 and
                    October 31.They were very fond of the water, and swam a great deal in both river and
                    harbor. Swimming races out to Devil Reef were very common, and everyone in sight seemed
                    well able to share in this arduous sport.It would be of no use, my informant said, to ask the natives anything about the
                    place. The only one who would talk was a very aged but normal-looking man who lived at
                    the poorhouse on the north rim of the town and spent his time walking about or
                    lounging around the fire station. This hoary character, Zadok Allen, was 96 years old and somewhat touched in the
                    head, besides being the town drunkard. He was a strange, furtive creature who constantly looked over his shoulder as if
                    afraid of something, and when sober could not be persuaded to talk at all with
                    strangers. He was, however, unable to resist any offer of his favorite poison; and once
                    drunk would furnish the most astonishing fragments of whispered
                    reminiscence.After all, though, little useful data could be gained from him; since his stories
                    were all insane, incomplete hints of impossible marvels and horrors which could
                    have no source save in his own distorted fancy. Nobody ever believed him, but the natives did not like him to drink and talk
                    with any strangers; and it was not always safe to be seen questioning him. It was probably from him that some of the wildest popular whispers and delusions
                    were derived.The Marshes, together with the other three gently bred families of the town--the
                    Waites, the Gilmans, and the Eliots--were all very retiring. They lived in immense houses along Washington Street, and several were reputed
                    to harbor in concealment certain kinsfolk whose personal aspect forbade public
                    view, and whose deaths had been reported and recorded.Warning me that most of the street signs were down, the youth drew for my benefit
                    a rough but ample and painstaking sketch map of the town's salient features. After a moment's study I felt sure that it would be of great help, and pocketed
                    it with profuse thanks.Thus began my systematic though half-bewildered tour of Innsmouth's narrow,
                    shadow-blighted ways. Crossing the bridge and turning toward the roar of the lower falls, I passed
                    close to the Marsh refinery, which seemed oddly free from the noise of
                    industry. This building stood on the steep river bluff near a bridge and an open
                    confluence of streets which I took to be the earliest civic center, displaced
                    after the Revolution by the present Town Square.Re-crossing the gorge on the Main Street bridge, I struck a region of utter
                    desertion which somehow made me shudder. Collapsing huddles of gambrel roofs formed a jagged and fantastic skyline, above
                    which rose the ghoulish, decapitated steeple of an ancient church.Fish Street was as deserted as Main, though it differed in having many brick and
                    stone warehouses still in excellent shape. Water Street was almost its duplicate, save that there were great seaward gaps
                    where wharves had been. Not a living thing did I see, except for the scattered fishermen on the distant
                    breakwater, and not a sound did I hear save the lapping of the harbor tides and
                    the roar of the falls in the Manuxet.I kept north along Main to Martin, then turning inland, crossing Federal Street
                    safely north of the Green, and entering the decayed patrician neighborhood of
                    northern Broad, Washington, Lafayette, and Adams Streets. Following Washington Street toward the river, I now faced a zone of former
                    industry and commerce; noting the ruins of a factory ahead, and seeing others,
                    with the traces of an old railway station and covered railway bridge beyond up
                    the gorge on my right.The uncertain bridge now before me was posted with a warning sign, but I took the
                    risk and crossed again to the south bank where traces of life reappeared. Furtive, shambling creatures stared cryptically in my direction, and more normal
                    faces eyed me coldly and curiously. Innsmouth was rapidly becoming intolerable, and I turned down Paine Street
                    toward the Square in the hope of getting some vehicle to take me to Arkham
                    before the still-distant starting time of that sinister bus.It was then that I saw the tumbledown fire station on my left, and noticed the
                    red-faced, bushy-bearded, watery-eyed old man in nondescript rags who sat on a
                    bench in front of it talking with a pair of unkempt but not abnormal-looking
                    firemen. This, of course, must be Zadok Allen, the half-crazed, liquorish non-agenarian
                    whose tales of old Innsmouth and its shadow were so hideous and incredible.I had been assured that the old man could do nothing but hint at wild,
                    disjointed, and incredible legends, and I had been warned that the natives made
                    it unsafe to be seen talking with him; yet the thought of this aged witness to
                    the town's decay, with memories going back to the early days of ships and
                    factories, was a _lure_ that no amount of reason could make me resist. Curiosity flared up beyond sense and caution, and in my youthful egotism I
                    fancied I might be able to sift a nucleus of real history from the confused,
                    extravagant outpouring I would probably extract with the aid of whiskey.A quart bottle of such was easily, though not cheaply, obtained in the rear of a
                    dingy variety-store just off the Square in Eliot Street.Re-entering the Square I saw that luck was with me; for--shuffling out of Paine
                    Street around the corner of the Gilman House--I glimpsed nothing less than the
                    tall, lean, tattered form of old Zadok Allen himself. In accordance with my plan, I attracted his attention by brandishing my
                    newly-purchased bottle; and soon realized that he had begun to shuffle wistfully
                    after me as I turned into Waite Street on my way to the most deserted region I
                    could think of. Before I reached Main Street I could hear a faint and wheezy "Hey,
                        Mister!" behind me, and I presently allowed the old man to catch up
                    and take copious pulls from the quart bottle. I began putting out feelers as we walked along to Water Street and turned
                    southward amidst the omnipresent desolation and crazily tilted ruins, but found
                    that the aged tongue did not loosen as quickly as I had expected. At length I saw a grass-grown opening toward the sea between crumbling brick
                    walls, with the weedy length of an earth-and-masonry wharf projecting
                    beyond. Piles of moss-covered stones near the water promised tolerable seats, and the
                    scene was sheltered from all possible view by a ruined warehouse on the
                    north.About four hours remained for conversation if I were to catch the eight o'clock
                    coach for Arkham, and I began to dole out more liquor to the ancient tippler;
                    meanwhile eating my own frugal lunch. In my donations I was careful not to overshoot the mark, for I did not wish
                    Zadok's vinous garrulousness to pass into a stupor. After an hour his furtive taciturnity showed signs of disappearing, and
                    something or other had caused his wandering gaze to light on the low, distant
                    line of Devil Reef, then showing plainly and almost fascinatingly above the
                    waves. He bent toward me, took hold of my coat lapel, and hissed out some hints that
                    could not be mistaken.The old man's whisper grew fainter, and I found myself shuddering at the terrible
                    and sincere portentousness of his intonation, even though I knew his tale could
                    be nothing but drunken phantasy.Here the old man faltered, mumbled, and lapsed into a moody and apprehensive
                    silence; glancing nervously over his shoulder and then turning back to stare
                    fascinatedly at the distant black reef. When I spoke to him he did not answer, so I knew I would have to let him finish
                    the bottle. He licked its nose and slipped it into his pocket, then beginning to nod and
                    whisper softly to himself. I bent close to catch any articulate words he might utter, and thought I saw a
                    sardonic smile behind the stained, bushy whiskers. Yes--he was really forming words, and I could grasp a fair proportion of
                    them.He stopped again, and from the look in his watery blue eyes I feared he was close
                    to a stupor after all. But when I gently shook his shoulder he turned on me with astonishing alertness
                    and snapped out some more obscure phrases.The watery blue eyes were almost savage and maniacal now, and the dirty white
                    beard bristled electrically. Old Zadok probably saw me shrink back, for he began to cackle evilly.The old man was getting hysterical, and I began to shiver with a nameless
                    alarm. He laid a gnarled claw on my shoulder, and it seemed to me that its shaking was
                    not altogether that of mirth.Zadok was showing signs of fright and exhaustion, and I let him keep silence for
                    a while, though glancing apprehensively at my watch. The tide had turned and was coming in now, and the sound of the waves seemed to
                    arouse him.The old man was panting, and perspiring profusely. His grip on my shoulder tightened.Old Zadok began to moan now, and tears were coursing down his channelled cheeks
                    into the depths of his beard.The sound of the incoming tide was now very insistent, and little by little it
                    seemed to change the old man's mood from maudlin tearfulness to watchful
                    fear. He would pause now and then to renew those nervous glances over his shoulder or
                    out toward the reef, and despite the wild absurdity of his tale, I could not
                    help beginning to share his vague apprehensiveness. Zadok now grew shriller, and seemed to be trying to whip up his courage with
                    louder speech.Zadok was really screaming now, and the mad frenzy of his voice disturbed me more
                    than I care to own.The hideous suddenness and inhuman frightfulness of the old man's shriek almost
                    made me faint. His eyes, looking past me toward the malodorous sea, were positively starting
                    from his head; while his face was a mask of fear worthy of Greek tragedy. His bony claw dug monstrously into my shoulder, and he made no motion as I
                    turned my head to look at whatever he had glimpsed.There was nothing that I could see. Only the incoming tide, with perhaps one set of ripples more local than the
                    long-flung line of breakers. But now Zadok was shaking me, and I turned back to watch the melting of that
                    fear-frozen face into a chaos of twitching eyelids and mumbling gums. Presently his voice came back--albeit as a trembling whisper.Another heavy wave dashed against the loosening masonry of the bygone wharf, and
                    changed the mad ancient's whisper to another inhuman and blood-curdling
                    scream.Before I could recover my scattered wits he had relaxed his clutch on my shoulder
                    and dashed wildly inland toward the street, reeling northward around the ruined
                    warehouse wall.I glanced back at the sea, but there was nothing there. And when I reached Water Street and looked along it toward the north there was
                    no remaining trace of Zadok Allen.I can hardly describe the mood in which I was left by this harrowing episode--an
                    episode at once mad and pitiful, grotesque and terrifying. The grocery boy had prepared me for it, yet the reality left me none the less
                    bewildered and disturbed. Puerile though the story was, old Zadok's insane earnestness and horror had
                    communicated to me a mounting unrest which joined with my earlier sense of
                    loathing for the town and its blight of intangible shadow.The hour had grown perilously late--my watch said 7:15, and the Arkham bus left
                    Town Square at eight--so I tried to give my thoughts as neutral and practical a
                    cast as possible, meanwhile walking rapidly through the deserted streets of
                    gaping roofs and leaning houses toward the hotel where I had checked my valise
                    and would find my bus.Studying the grocery youth's map and seeking a route I had not traversed before,
                    I chose Marsh Street instead of State for my approach to Town Square. Near the corner of Fall Street I began to see scattered groups of furtive
                    whisperers, and when I finally reached the Square I saw that almost all the
                    loiterers were congregated around the door of the Gilman House. It seemed as if many bulging, watery, unwinking eyes looked oddly at me as I
                    claimed my valise in the lobby, and I hoped that none of these unpleasant
                    creatures would be my fellow-passengers on the coach.The bus, rather early, rattled in with three passengers somewhat before eight,
                    and an evil-looking fellow on the sidewalk muttered a few indistinguishable
                    words to the driver. I was, it appeared, in very bad luck. There had been something wrong with the engine, despite the excellent time made
                    from Newburyport, and the bus could not complete the journey to Arkham. No, it could not possibly be repaired that night, nor was there any other way of
                    getting transportation out of Innsmouth, either to Arkham or elsewhere. Sargent was sorry, but I would have to stop over at the Gilman. Probably the clerk would make the price easy for me, but there was nothing else
                    to do. Almost dazed by this sudden obstacle, and violently dreading the fall of night
                    in this decaying and half-unlighted town, I left the bus and reentered the hotel
                    lobby; where the sullen, queer-looking night clerk told me I could have Room 428
                    on next the top floor--large, but without running water--for a dollar.Despite what I had heard of this hotel in Newburyport, I signed the register,
                    paid my dollar, let the clerk take my valise, and followed that sour, solitary
                    attendant up three creaking flights of stairs past dusty corridors which seemed
                    wholly devoid of life. My room, a dismal rear one with two windows and bare, cheap furnishings,
                    over-looked a dingy courtyard otherwise hemmed in by low, deserted brick blocks,
                    and commanded a view of decrepit westward-stretching roofs with a marshy
                    countryside beyond. At the end of the corridor was a bathroom--a discouraging relique with ancient
                    marble bowl, tin tub, faint electric light, and musty wooden panelling around
                    all the plumbing fixtures.As twilight deepened I turned on the one feeble electric bulb over the cheap,
                    iron-framed bed, and tried as best I could to read. I felt it advisable to keep my mind wholesomely occupied, for it would not do to
                    brood over the abnormalities of this ancient, blight-shadowed town while I was
                    still within its borders. The insane yarn I had heard from the aged drunkard did not promise very pleasant
                    dreams, and I felt I must keep the image of his wild, watery eyes as far as
                    possible from my imagination.Another thing that disturbed me was the absence of a bolt on the door of my
                    room. One had been there, as marks clearly showed, but there were signs of recent
                    removal. No doubt it had become out of order, like so many other things in this decrepit
                    edifice. In my nervousness I looked around and discovered a bolt on the clothespress
                    which seemed to be of the same size, judging from the marks, as the one formerly
                    on the door. To gain a partial relief from the general tension I busied myself by
                    transferring this hardware to the vacant place with the aid of a handy
                    three-in-one device including a screw-driver which I kept on my keyring. The bolt fitted perfectly, and I was somewhat relieved when I knew that I could
                    shoot it firmly upon retiring. There were adequate bolts on the two lateral doors to connecting rooms, and
                    these I proceeded to fasten.I did not undress, but decided to read till I was sleepy and then lie down with
                    only my coat, collar, and shoes off. Taking a pocket flashlight from my valise, I placed it in my trousers, so that I
                    could read my watch if I woke up later in the dark. Drowsiness, however, did not come; and when I stopped to analyze my thoughts I
                    found to my disquiet that I was really unconsciously listening for
                    something--listening for something which I dreaded but could not name.At length, feeling a fatigue which had nothing of drowsiness in it, I bolted the
                    newly outfitted hall door, turned off the light, and threw myself down on the
                    hard, uneven bed--coat, collar, shoes, and all. In the darkness every faint noise of the night seemed magnified, and a flood of
                    doubly unpleasant thoughts swept over me. I was sorry I had put out the light, yet was too tired to rise and turn it on
                    again. Then, after a long, dreary interval, and prefaced by a fresh creaking of stairs
                    and corridor, there came that soft, damnably unmistakable sound which seemed
                    like a malign fulfilment of all my apprehensions. Without the least shadow of a doubt, the lock on my hall door was being
                    tried--cautiously, furtively, tentatively--with a key.The change in the menace from vague premonition to immediate reality was a
                    profound shock, and fell upon me with the force of a genuine blow. It never once occurred to me that the fumbling might be a mere mistake. Malign purpose was all I could think of, and I kept deathly quiet, awaiting the
                    would-be intruder's next move.After a time the cautious rattling ceased, and I heard the room to the north
                    entered with a pass key. Then the lock of the connecting door to my room was softly tried. The bolt held, of course, and I heard the floor creak as the prowler left the
                    room. After a moment there came another soft rattling, and I knew that the room to the
                    south of me was being entered. Again a furtive trying of a bolted connecting door, and again a receding
                    creaking. This time the creaking went along the hall and down the stairs, so I knew that
                    the prowler had realized the bolted condition of my doors and was giving up his
                    attempt for a time._The one thing to do was to get out of that hotel alive as quickly as I could,
                    and through some channel other than the front stairs and lobby!Rising softly and throwing my flashlight on the switch, I sought to light the
                    bulb over my bed in order to choose and pocket some belongings for a swift,
                    valiseless flight. Nothing, however, happened; and I saw that the power had been cut off. So, filling my pockets with the flashlight's aid, I put on my hat and tiptoed to
                    the windows to consider chances of descent. Despite the state's safety regulations there was no fire escape on this side of
                    the hotel, and I saw that my windows commanded only a sheer three-story drop to
                    the cobbled courtyard. On the right and left, however, some ancient brick business blocks abutted on
                    the hotel; their slant roofs coming up to a reasonable jumping distance from my
                    fourth-story level. To reach either of these lines of buildings I would have to be in a room two
                    doors from my own--in one case on the north and in the other case on the
                    south--and my mind instantly set to work calculating what chances I had of
                    making the transfer.First, I reinforced my own outer door by pushing the bureau against it--little by
                    little, in order to make a minimum of sound. Then, gathering from the grocery boy's map that the best route out of town was
                    southward, I glanced first at the connecting door on the south side of the
                    room. It was designed to open in my direction, hence I saw--after drawing the bolt and
                    finding other fastenings in place--it was not a favorable one for forcing. Accordingly abandoning it as a route, I cautiously moved the bedstead against it
                    to hamper any attack which might be made on it later from the next room. The door on the north was hung to open away from me, and this--though a test
                    proved it to be locked or bolted from the other side--I knew must be my
                    route. If I could gain the roofs of the buildings in Paine Street and descend
                    successfully to the ground level, I might perhaps dart through the courtyard and
                    the adjacent or opposite buildings to Washington or Bates--or else emerge in
                    Paine and edge around southward into Washington. In any case, I would aim to strike Washington somehow and get quickly out of the
                    Town Square region. My preference would be to avoid Paine, since the fire station there might be
                    open all night.I was irresolutely speculating on when I had better attack the northward door,
                    and on how I could least audibly manage it, when I noticed that the vague noises
                    underfoot had given place to a fresh and heavier creaking of the stairs. A wavering flicker of light showed through my transom, and the boards of the
                    corridor began to groan with a ponderous load. Muffled sounds of possible vocal origin approached, and at length a firm knock
                    came at my outer door.For a moment I simply held my breath and waited. Eternities seemed to elapse, and the nauseous fishy odor of my environment
                    seemed to mount suddenly and spectacularly. Then the knocking was repeated--continuously, and with growing insistence. I knew that the time for action had come, and forthwith drew the bolt of the
                    northward connecting door, bracing myself for the task of battering it open. The knocking waxed louder, and I hoped that its volume would cover the sound of
                    my efforts. At last beginning my attempt, I lunged again and again at the thin panelling
                    with my left shoulder, heedless of shock or pain.Finally the connecting door gave, but with such a crash that I knew those outside
                    must have heard. Instantly the outside knocking became a violent battering, while keys sounded
                    ominously in the hall doors of the rooms on both sides of me. Rushing through the newly opened connection, I succeeded in bolting the
                    northerly hall door before the lock could be turned; but even as I did so I
                    heard the hall door of the third room--the one from whose window I had hoped to
                    reach the roof below--being tried with a pass key.For an instant I felt absolute despair, since my trapping in a chamber with no
                    window egress seemed complete. Then, with a dazed automatism, I made for the next connecting door and performed
                    the blind motion of pushing at it in an effort to get through!Sheer fortunate chance gave me my reprieve--for the connecting door before me was
                    not only unlocked but actually ajar. In a second I was through, and had my right knee and shoulder against a hall
                    door which was visibly opening inward. My pressure took the opener off guard, for the thing shut as I pushed, so that I
                    could slip the well-conditioned bolt as I had done with the other door. As I gained this respite I heard the battering at the two other doors abate,
                    while a confused clatter came from the connecting door I had shielded with the
                    bedstead. Evidently the bulk of my assailants had entered the southerly room and were
                    massing in a lateral attack. But at the same moment a pass key sounded in the next door to the north, and I
                    knew that a nearer peril was at hand.The northward connecting door was wide open, but there was no time to think about
                    checking the already turning lock in the hall. All I could do was to shut and bolt the open connecting door, as well as its
                    mate on the opposite side--pushing a bedstead against the one and a bureau
                    against the other, and moving a washstand in front of the hall door. I must, I saw, trust to such makeshift barriers to shield me till I could get
                    out the window and on the roof of the Paine Street block. But even in this acute moment my chief horror was something apart from the
                    immediate weakness of my defenses. I was shuddering because not one of my pursuers, despite some hideous pantings,
                    gruntings, and subdued barkings at odd intervals, was uttering an intelligible
                    vocal sound!As I moved the furniture and rushed toward the windows I heard a frightful
                    scurrying along the corridor toward the room north of me, and perceived that the
                    southward battering had ceased. Plainly, most of my opponents were about to concentrate against the feeble
                    connecting door which they knew must open directly on me. Outside, the moon played on the ridge-pole of the block below, and I saw that
                    the jump would be desperately hazardous because of the steep surface on which I
                    must land.The clatter at the northerly connecting door was now terrific, and I saw that the
                    weak panelling was beginning to splinter. Obviously, the besiegers had brought some ponderous object into play as a
                    battering-ram. The bedstead, however, still held firm; so that I had at least a faint chance of
                    making good my escape. As I opened the window I noticed that it was flanked by heavy velour draperies
                    suspended from a pole by brass rings, and also that there was a large projecting
                    catch for the shutters on the exterior. Seeing a possible means of avoiding the dangerous jump, I yanked at the hangings
                    and brought them down, pole and all; then quickly hooking two of the rings in
                    the shutter catch and flinging the drapery outside. The heavy folds reached fully to the abutting roof, and I saw that the rings and
                    catch would be likely to bear my weight. So, climbing out of the window and down the improvised rope ladder, I left
                    behind me forever the morbid and horror-infested fabric of the Gilman House.I landed safely on the loose slates of the steep roof, and succeeded in gaining
                    the gaping black skylight without a slip. The place inside was ghoulish-looking, but I was past minding such impressions
                    and made at once for the staircase revealed by my flashlight--after a hasty
                    glance at my watch, which showed the hour to be 2 A.M. The steps creaked, but seemed tolerably sound; and I raced down past a barnlike
                    second story to the ground floor. The desolation was complete, and only echoes answered my footfalls.The hallway inside was black, and when I reached the opposite end I saw that the
                    street door was wedged immovably shut. Resolved to try another building, I groped my way toward the courtyard, but
                    stopped short when close to the doorway.For out of an opened door in the Gilman House a large crowd of doubtful shapes
                    was pouring--lanterns bobbing in the darkness, and horrible croaking voices
                    exchanging low cries in what was certainly not English. Their features were indistinguishable, but their crouching, shambling gait was
                    abominably repellent. And worst of all, I perceived that one figure was strangely robed, and
                    unmistakably surmounted by a tall tiara of a design altogether too familiar. Again groping toward the street, I opened a door off the hall and came upon an
                    empty room with closely shuttered but sashless windows. Fumbling in the rays of my flashlight, I found I could open the shutters; and in
                    another moment had climbed outside and was carefully closing the aperture in its
                    original manner.I walked rapidly, softly, and close to the ruined houses. At Bates Street I drew into a yawning vestibule while two shambling figures
                    crossed in front of me, but was soon on my way again and approaching the open
                    space where Eliot Street obliquely crosses Washington at the intersection of
                    South. Though I had never seen this space, it had looked dangerous to me on the grocery
                    youth's map; since the moonlight would have free play there. There was no use trying to evade it, for any alternative course would involve
                    detours of possibly disastrous visibility and delaying effect. The only thing to do was to cross it boldly and openly; imitating the typical
                    shamble of the Innsmouth folk as best I could, and trusting that no one--or at
                    least no pursuer of mine--would be there.Just how fully the pursuit was organized--and indeed, just what its purpose might
                    be--I could form no idea. There seemed to be unusual activity in the town, but I judged that the news of
                    my escape from the Gilman had not yet spread. The open space was, as I had expected, strongly moonlit. But my progress was unimpeded, and no fresh sound arose to hint that I had been
                    spied. Glancing about me, I involuntarily let my pace slacken for a second to take in
                    the sight of the sea, gorgeous in the burning moonlight at the street's end. Far out beyond the breakwater was the dim, dark line of Devil Reef.Then, without warning, I saw the intermittent flashes of light on the distant
                    reef. My muscles tightened for panic flight, held in only by a certain unconscious
                    caution and half-hypnotic fascination. And to make matters worse, there now flashed forth from the lofty cupola of the
                    Gilman House, which loomed up to the northeast behind me, a series of analogous
                    though differently spaced gleams which could be nothing less than an answering
                    signal.I now bent to the left around the ruinous green; still gazing toward the ocean as
                    it blazed in the spectral summer moonlight, and watching the cryptical flashing
                    of those nameless, unexplainable beacons.It was then that the most horrible impression of all was borne in upon me--the
                    impression which destroyed my last vestige of self-control and sent me running
                    frantically southward past the yawning black doorways and fishily staring
                    windows of that deserted nightmare street. For at a closer glance I saw that the moonlit waters between the reef and the
                    shore were far from empty. They were alive with a teeming horde of shapes swimming inward toward the
                    town!My frantic running ceased before I had covered a block, for at my left I began to
                    hear something like the hue and cry of organized pursuit. There were footsteps and guttural sounds, and a rattling motor wheezed south
                    along Federal Street. In a second all my plans were utterly changed--for if the southward highway were
                    blocked ahead of me, I must clearly find another egress from Innsmouth. I paused and drew into a gaping doorway, reflecting how lucky I was to have left
                    the moonlit open space before these pursuers came down the parallel street.Then I thought of the abandoned railway to Rowley, whose solid line of ballasted,
                    weed-grown earth still stretched off to the northwest from the crumbling station
                    on the edge of the river gorge. There was just a chance that the townsfolk would not think of that!Drawing inside the hall of my deserted shelter, I once more consulted the grocery
                    boy's map with the aid of the flashlight. The immediate problem was how to reach the ancient railway; and I now saw that
                    the safest course was ahead to Babson Street, then west to Lafayette--there
                    edging around but not crossing an open space homologous to the one I had
                    traversed--and subsequently back northward and westward in zigzagging line
                    through Lafayette, Bates, Adams, and Banks Streets--the latter skirting the
                    river gorge--to the abandoned and dilapidated station I had seen from my
                    window. My reason for going ahead to Babson was that I wished neither to re-cross the
                    earlier open space nor to begin my westward course along a cross street as broad
                    as South. I crossed the street to the right-hand side in order to edge around into Babson
                    as inconspicuously as possible.In Babson Street I clung as closely as possible to the sagging, uneven buildings;
                    twice pausing in a doorway as the noises behind me momentarily increased. The open space ahead shone wide and desolate under the moon, but my route would
                    not force me to cross it. During my second pause I began to detect a fresh distribution of the vague
                    sounds; and upon looking cautiously out from cover beheld a motor car darting
                    across the open space, bound outward along Eliot Street.As I watched--choked by a sudden rise in the fishy odor after a short
                    abatement--I saw a band of uncouth, crouching shapes loping and shambling in the
                    same direction; and knew that this must be the party guarding the Ipswich road,
                    since that highway forms an extension of Eliot Street. Two of the figures I glimpsed were in voluminous robes, and one wore a peaked
                    diadem which glistened whitely in the moonlight. The gait of this figure was so odd that it sent a chill through me--for it
                    seemed to me the creature was almost _hopping_.When the last of the band was out of sight I resumed my progress; darting around
                    the corner into Lafayette Street, and crossing Eliot very hurriedly lest
                    stragglers of the party be still advancing along that thoroughfare. I did hear some croaking and clattering sounds far off toward Town Square, but
                    accomplished the passage without disaster. My greatest dread was in re-crossing broad and moonlit South Street--with its
                    seaward view--and I had to nerve myself for the ordeal. Someone might easily be looking, and possible Eliot Street stragglers could not
                    fail to glimpse me from either of two points. At the last moment I decided I had better slacken my trot and make the crossing
                    as before in the shambling gait of an average Innsmouth native.I had not quite crossed the street when I heard a muttering band advancing along
                    Washington from the north. As they reached the broad open space where I had had my first disquieting
                    glimpse of the moonlit water I could see them plainly only a block away--and was
                    horrified by the bestial abnormality of their faces and the dog-like
                    sub-humanness of their crouching gait. One man moved in a positively simian way, with long arms frequently touching the
                    ground; while another figure--robed and tiaraed--seemed to progress in an almost
                    hopping fashion. I judged this party to be the one I had seen in the Gilman's courtyard--the one,
                    therefore, most closely on my trail. As some of the figures turned to look in my direction I was transfixed with
                    fright, yet managed to preserve the casual, shambling gait I had assumed. To this day I do not know whether they saw me or not. If they did, my stratagem must have deceived them, for they passed on across the
                    moonlit space without varying their course--meanwhile croaking and jabbering in
                    some hateful guttural patois I could not identify.Once more in shadow, I resumed my former dog-trot past the leaning and decrepit
                    houses that stared blankly into the night. Having crossed to the western sidewalk I rounded the nearest corner into Bates
                    Street, where I kept close to the buildings on the southern side. At last I saw the ancient arcaded station--or what was left of it--and made
                    directly for the tracks that started from its farther end.The rails were rusty but mainly intact, and not more than half the ties had
                    rotted away. Walking or running on such a surface was very difficult; but I did my best, and
                    on the whole made very fair time. For some distance the line kept on along the gorge's brink, but at length I
                    reached the long covered bridge where it crossed the chasm at a dizzy
                    height. The condition of this bridge would determine my next step. If humanly possible, I would use it; if not, I would have to risk more street
                    wandering and take the nearest intact highway bridge.The vast, barnlike length of the old bridge gleamed spectrally in the moonlight
                    and I saw that the ties were safe for at least a few feet within. Entering, I began to use my flashlight, and was almost knocked down by the cloud
                    of bats that flapped past me. About halfway across there was a perilous gap in the ties which I feared for a
                    moment would halt me; but in the end I risked a desperate jump which fortunately
                    succeeded.I was glad to see the moonlight again when I emerged from that macabre
                    tunnel. The old tracks crossed River Street at a grade, and at once veered off into a
                    region increasingly rural and with less and less of Innsmouth's abhorrent fishy
                    odor. Here the dense growth of weeds and briers hindered me and cruelly tore my
                    clothes, but I was none the less glad that they were there to give me
                    concealment in case of peril. I knew that much of my route must be visible from the Rowley road.The marshy region began very shortly, with the single track on a low, grassy
                    embankment. Then came a sort of island of higher ground, where the line passed through a
                    shallow open cut choked with bushes and brambles. I was very glad of this partial shelter, since at this point the Rowley road was
                    uncomfortably near according to my window view.Just before entering the cut I glanced behind me, but saw no pursuer. The ancient spires and roofs of decaying Innsmouth gleamed lovely and ethereal
                    in the magic yellow moonlight, and I thought of how they must have looked in the
                    old days before the shadow fell. Then, as my gaze circled inland from the town, something less tranquil arrested
                    my notice and held me immobile for a second.What I saw--or fancied I saw--was a disturbing suggestion of undulant motion far
                    to the south; a suggestion which made me conclude that a very large horde must
                    be pouring out of the city along the level Ipswich road. The distance was great, and I could distinguish nothing in detail; but I did not
                    at all like the look of that moving column.All sorts of unpleasant conjectures crossed my mind. I thought of those very extreme Innsmouth types said to be hidden in crumbling,
                    centuried warrens near the waterfront. I thought, too, of those nameless swimmers I had seen. Counting the parties so far glimpsed, as well as those presumably covering other
                    roads, the number of my pursuers must be strangely large for a town as
                    depopulated as Innsmouth.Who were they? Why were they here? And if such a column of them was scouring the Ipswich road, would the patrols on
                    the other roads be likewise augmented?I had entered the brush-grown cut and was struggling along at a very slow pace
                    when that damnable fishy odor again waxed dominant. There were sounds, too--a kind of wholesale, colossal flopping or pattering
                    which somehow called up images of the most detestable sort.And then both stench and sounds grew stronger, so that I paused shivering and
                    grateful for the cut's protection. It was here, I recalled, that the Rowley road drew so close to the old railway
                    before crossing westward and diverging. Something was coming along that road, and I must lie low till its passage and
                    vanishment in the distance. Crouched in the bushes of that sandy cleft I felt reasonably safe, even though I
                    knew the searchers would have to cross the track in front of me not much more
                    than a hundred yards away. I would be able to see them, but they could not, except by a malign miracle, see
                    me.All at once I began dreading to look at them as they passed. I saw the close moonlit space where they would surge by, and had curious
                    thoughts about the irredeemable pollution of that space. They would perhaps be the worst of all Innsmouth types--something one would not
                    care to remember.The stench waxed overpowering, and the noises swelled to a bestial babel of
                    croaking, baying, and barking, without the least suggestion of human speech. Were these indeed the voices of my pursuers? That flopping or pattering was monstrous--I could not look upon the degenerate
                    creatures responsible for it. I would keep my eyes shut till the sounds receded toward the west. The horde was very close now--the air foul with their hoarse snarlings, and the
                    ground almost shaking with their alien-rhythmed footfalls. My breath nearly ceased to come, and I put every ounce of will-power into the
                    task of holding my eyelids down.I am not even yet willing to say whether what followed was a hideous actuality or
                    only a nightmare hallucination. The later action of the government, after my frantic appeals, would tend to
                    confirm it as a monstrous truth; but could not an hallucination have been
                    repeated under the quasi-hypnotic spell of that ancient, haunted, and shadowed
                    town?But I must try to tell what I thought I saw that night under the mocking yellow
                    moon--saw surging and hopping down the Rowley road in plain sight in front of me
                    as I crouched among the wild brambles of that desolate railway cut. Of course my resolution to keep my eyes shut had failed. It was foredoomed to failure--for who could crouch blindly while a legion of
                    croaking, baying entities of unknown source flopped noisomely past, scarcely
                    more than a hundred yards away?For I knew that a long section of them must be plainly in sight where the sides
                    of the cut flattened out and the road crossed the track--and I could no longer
                    keep myself from sampling whatever horror that leering yellow moon might have to
                    show.It was the end, for whatever remains to me of life on the surface of this earth,
                    of every vestige of mental peace and confidence in the integrity of nature and
                    of the human mind. Can it be possible that this planet has actually spawned such things; that human
                    eyes have truly seen, as objective flesh, what man has hitherto known only in
                    febrile phantasy and tenuous legend?And yet I saw them in a limitless stream--flopping, hopping, croaking,
                    bleating--surging inhumanly through the spectral moonlight in a grotesque,
                    malignant saraband of fantastic nightmare. And some of them had tall
                    tiaras of that nameless whitish-gold metal ... and some were
                    strangely robed ... and one, who led the way, was clad in a
                    ghoulishly humped black coat and striped trousers, and had a man's felt hat
                    perched on the shapeless thing that answered for a head...I think their predominant color was a grayish-green, though they had white
                    bellies. They were mostly shiny and slippery, but the ridges of their backs were
                    scaly. Their forms vaguely suggested the anthropoid, while their heads were the heads
                    of fish, with prodigious bulging eyes that never closed. At the sides of their necks were palpitating gills, and their long paws were
                    webbed. They hopped irregularly, sometimes on two legs and sometimes on four. I was somehow glad that they had no more than four limbs. Their croaking, baying voices, clearly used for articulate speech, held all the
                    dark shades of expression which their staring faces lacked.But for all of their monstrousness they were not unfamiliar to me. I knew too well what they must be--for was not the memory of that evil tiara at
                    Newburyport still fresh? They were the blasphemous fish-frogs of the nameless design--living and
                    horrible--and as I saw them I knew also of what that humped, tiaraed priest in
                    the black church basement had so fearsomely reminded me. Their number was past guessing. It seemed to me that there were limitless swarms of them--and certainly my
                    momentary glimpse could have shown only the least fraction. In another instant everything was blotted out by a merciful fit of fainting; the
                    first I had ever had.It was a gentle daylight rain that awaked me from my stupor in the brush-grown
                    railway cut, and when I staggered out to the roadway ahead I saw no trace of any
                    prints in the fresh mud. Innsmouth's ruined roofs and toppling steeples loomed up grayly toward the
                    southeast, but not a living creature did I spy in all the desolate salt marshes
                    around. My watch was still going, and told me that the hour was past noon.The reality of what I had been through was highly uncertain in my mind, but I
                    felt that something hideous lay in the background. I must get away from evil-shadowed Innsmouth--and accordingly I began to test my
                    cramped, wearied powers of locomotion. Despite weakness, hunger, horror, and bewilderment I found myself after a time
                    able to walk; so started slowly along the muddy road to Rowley. Before evening I was in the village, getting a meal and providing myself with
                    presentable clothes. I caught the night train to Arkham, and the next day talked long and earnestly
                    with government officials there; a process I later repeated in Boston. With the main result of these colloquies the public is now familiar--and I wish,
                    for normality's sake, there were nothing more to tell. Perhaps it is madness that is overtaking me--yet perhaps a greater horror--or a
                    greater marvel--is reaching out.I dared not look for that piece of strange jewelry said to be in the Miskatonic
                    University Museum. I did, however, improve my stay in Arkham by collecting some genealogical notes
                    I had long wished to possess; very rough and hasty data, it is true, but capable
                    of good use later on when I might have time to collate and codify them. The curator of the historical society there--Mr. E. Lapham Peabody--was very courteous about assisting me, and expressed unusual
                    interest when I told him I was a grandson of Eliza Orne of Arkham, who was born
                    in 1867 and had married James Williamson of Ohio at the age of seventeen.It seemed that a maternal uncle of mine had been there many years before on a
                    quest much like my own; and that my grandmother's family was a topic of some
                    local curiosity. There had, Mr. Peabody said, been considerable discussion about the marriage of her father,
                    Benjamin Orne, just after the Civil War; since the ancestry of the bride was
                    peculiarly puzzling. That bride was understood to have been an orphaned Marsh of New Hampshire--a
                    cousin of the Essex County Marshes--but her education had been in France and she
                    knew very little of her family. A guardian had deposited funds in a Boston bank to maintain her and her French
                    governess; but that guardian's name was unfamiliar to Arkham people, and in time
                    he dropped out of sight, so that the governess assumed his role by court
                    appointment. The French-woman--now long dead--was very taciturn, and there were those who
                    said she could have told more than she did.But the most baffling thing was the inability of anyone to place the recorded
                    parents of the young woman--Enoch and Lydia (Meserve) Marsh--among the known
                    families of New Hampshire. Possibly, many suggested, she was the natural daughter of some Marsh of
                    prominence--she certainly had the true Marsh eyes. Most of the puzzling was done after her early death, which took place at the
                    birth of my grandmother--her only child. Having formed some disagreeable impressions connected with the name of Marsh, I
                    did not welcome the news that it belonged on my own ancestral tree; nor was I
                    pleased by Mr. Peabody's suggestion that I had the true Marsh eyes myself. However, I was grateful for data which I knew would prove valuable; and took
                    copious notes and lists of book references regarding the well-documented Orne
                    family.I went directly home to Toledo from Boston, and later spent a month at Maumee
                    recuperating from my ordeal. In September I entered Oberlin for my final year, and from then till the next
                    June was busy with studies and other wholesome activities--reminded of the
                    bygone terror only by occasional official visits from government men in
                    connection with the campaign which my pleas and evidence had started. Around the middle of July--just a year after the Innsmouth experience--I spent a
                    week with my late mother's family in Cleveland; checking some of my new
                    genealogical data with the various notes, traditions, and bits of heirloom
                    material in existence there, and seeing what kind of a connected chart I could
                    construct.I did not exactly relish this task, for the atmosphere of the Williamson home had
                    always depressed me. There was a strain of morbidity there, and my mother had never encouraged my
                    visiting her parents as a child, although she always welcomed her father when he
                    came to Toledo. My Arkham-born grandmother had seemed strange and almost terrifying to me, and I
                    do not think I grieved when she disappeared. I was eight years old then, and it was said that she had wandered off in grief
                    after the suicide of my uncle Douglas, her eldest son. He had shot himself after a trip to New England--the same trip, no doubt, which
                    had caused him to be recalled at the Arkham Historical Society.This uncle had resembled her, and I had never liked him either. Something about the staring, unwinking expression of both of them had given me a
                    vague, unaccountable uneasiness. My mother and uncle Walter had not looked like that. They were like their father, though poor little cousin Lawrence--Walter's
                    son--had been an almost perfect duplicate of his grandmother before his
                    condition took him to the permanent seclusion of a sanitarium at Canton. I had not seen him in four years, but my uncle once implied that his state, both
                    mental and physical, was very bad. This worry had probably been a major cause of his mother's death two years
                    before.My grandfather and his widowered son Walter now comprised the Cleveland
                    household, but the memory of older times hung thickly over it. I still disliked the place, and tried to get my researches done as quickly as
                    possible. Williamson records and traditions were supplied in abundance by my grandfather;
                    though for Orne material I had to depend on my uncle Walter, who put at my
                    disposal the contents of all his files, including notes, letters, cuttings,
                    heirlooms, photographs, and miniatures.It was in going over the letters and pictures on the Orne side that I began to
                    acquire a kind of terror of my own ancestry. As I have said, my grandmother and uncle Douglas had always disturbed me. Now, years after their passing, I gazed at their pictured faces with a
                    measurably heightened feeling of repulsion and alienation. I could not at first understand the change, but gradually a horrible sort of
                    _comparison_ began to obtrude itself on my unconscious mind despite the steady
                    refusal of my consciousness to admit even the least suspicion of it. It was clear that the typical expression of these faces now suggested something
                    it had not suggested before--something which would bring stark panic if too
                    openly thought of.But the worst shock came when my uncle showed me the Orne jewelry in a downtown
                    safe-deposit vault. Some of the items were delicate and inspiring enough, but there was one box of
                    strange old pieces descended from my mysterious great-grandmother which my uncle
                    was almost reluctant to produce. They were, he said, of very grotesque and almost repulsive design.As my uncle began slowly and grudgingly to unwrap the things, he urged me not to
                    be shocked by the strangeness and frequent hideousness of the designs. There were two armlets, a tiara, and a kind of pectoral; the latter having in
                    high relief certain figures of almost unbearable extravagance.He seemed to expect some demonstration when the first piece--the tiara--became
                    visible, but I doubt if he expected quite what actually happened. I did not expect it, either, for I thought I was thoroughly forewarned regarding
                    what the jewelry would turn out to be. What I did was to faint silently away just as I had done in that brier-choked
                    railway cut a year before.From that day on my life has been a nightmare of brooding and apprehension, nor
                    do I know how much is hideous truth and how much madness. My great-grandmother had been a Marsh of unknown source whose husband lived in
                    Arkham--and did not old Zadok say that the daughter of Obed Marsh by a monstrous
                    mother was married to an Arkham man through a trick? What was it the ancient toper had muttered about the likeness of my eyes to
                    Captain Obed's? In Arkham, too, the curator had told me I had the true Marsh eyes. Was Obed Marsh my own great-great-grandfather? Who--or _what_--then, was my great-great-grandmother? But perhaps this was all madness. Those whitish-gold ornaments might easily have been bought from some Innsmouth
                    sailor by the father of my great-grandmother, whoever he was. And that look in the staring-eyed faces of my grandmother and self-slain uncle
                    might be sheer fancy, bolstered up by the Innsmouth shadow which had so darkly
                    colored my imagination. But why had my uncle killed himself after an ancestral quest in New England?For more than two years I fought off these reflections with partial success. My father secured me a place in an insurance office, and I buried myself in
                    routine as deeply as possible. In the winter of 1930-31, however, the dreams began. They were very sparse and insidious at first, but increased in frequency and
                    vividness as the weeks went by. Great watery spaces opened out before me, and I seemed to wander through titanic
                    sunken porticos and labyrinths of weedy cyclopean walls and grotesque fishes as
                    my companions. Then the _other shapes_ began to appear, filling me with nameless horror the
                    moment I awoke. But during the dreams they did not horrify me at all--I was one with them;
                    wearing their unhuman trappings, treading their aqueous ways, and praying
                    monstrously at their evil sea-bottom temples.There was much more than I could remember, but even what I did remember each
                    morning would be enough to stamp me as a madman or a genius if ever I dared
                    write it down. Some frightful influence, I felt, was seeking gradually to drag me out of the
                    sane world of wholesome life into unnameable abysses of blackness and alienage;
                    and the process told heavily on me. My health and appearance grew steadily worse, till finally I was forced to give
                    up my position and adopt the static, secluded life of an invalid. Some odd nervous affliction had me in its grip, and I found myself at times
                    almost unable to shut my eyes.It was then that I began to study the mirror with mounting alarm. The slow ravages of disease are not pleasant to watch, but in my case there was
                    something subtler and more puzzling in the background. My father seemed to notice it, too, for he began looking at me curiously and
                    almost affrightedly. What was taking place in me? Could it be that I was coming to resemble my grandmother and uncle Douglas?One night I had a frightful dream in which I met my grandmother under the
                    sea. She lived in a phosphorescent palace of many terraces, with gardens of strange
                    leprous corals and grotesque brachiate efflorescences, and welcomed me with a
                    warmth that may have been sardonic. She had changed--as those who take to the water change--and told me she had
                    never died. Instead, she had gone to a spot her dead son had learned about, and had leaped
                    to a realm whose wonders--destined for him as well--he had spurned with a
                    smoking pistol. This was to be my realm, too--I could not escape it. I would never die, but would live with those who had lived since before man ever
                    walked the earth.I met also that which had been her grandmother. For eighty thousand years Pth'thya-l'yi had lived in Y'ha-nthlei, and thither
                    she had gone back after Obed Marsh was dead. Y'ha-nthlei was not destroyed when the upper-earth men shot death into the
                    sea. It was hurt, but not destroyed. The Deep Ones could never be destroyed, even though the palaeogean magic of the
                    forgotten Old Ones might sometimes check them. For the present they would rest; but some day, if they remembered, they would
                    rise again for the tribute Great Cthulhu craved. It would be a city greater than Innsmouth next time. They had planned to spread, and had brought up that which would help them, but
                    now they must wait once more. For bringing the upper-earth men's death I must do a penance, but that would not
                    be heavy. This was the dream in which I saw a _shoggoth_ for the first time, and the sight
                    set me awake in a frenzy of screaming. That morning the mirror definitely told me I had acquired _the Innsmouth
                    look_.So far I have not shot myself as my uncle Douglas did. I bought an automatic and almost took the step, but certain dreams deterred
                    me. The tense extremes of horror are lessening, and I feel queerly drawn toward the
                    unknown sea-deeps instead of fearing them. I hear and do strange things in sleep, and awake with a kind of exaltation
                    instead of terror. I do not believe I need to wait for the full change as most have waited. If I did, my father would probably shut me up in a sanitarium as my poor little
                    cousin is shut up. Stupendous and unheard-of splendors await me below, and I shall seek them
                    soon. _I-R'lyeh! Cthulhu fhtagn! I! I!_ No, I shall not shoot myself--I cannot be made to shoot myself!I shall plan my cousin's escape from that Canton madhouse, and together we shall
                    go to marvel-shadowed Innsmouth. We shall swim out to that brooding reef in the sea and dive down through black
                    abysses to cyclopean and many-columned Y'ha-nthlei, and in that lair of the Deep
                    Ones we shall dwell amidst wonder and glory forever.I am forced into speech because men of science have refused to follow my advice
                without knowing why. It is altogether against my will that I tell my reasons for opposing this
                contemplated invasion of the antarctic--with its vast fossil hunt and its wholesale
                boring and melting of the ancient ice caps. And I am the more reluctant because my warning may be in vain.Doubt of the real facts, as I must reveal them, is inevitable; yet, if I suppressed
                what will seem extravagant and incredible there would be nothing left. The hitherto withheld photographs, both ordinary and aërial, will count in my favor,
                for they are damnably vivid and graphic. Still, they will be doubted because of the great lengths to which clever fakery can
                be carried. The ink drawings, of course, will be jeered at as obvious impostures;
                notwithstanding a strangeness and technique which art experts ought to remark and
                puzzle over.In the end I must rely on the judgment and standing of the few scientific leaders who
                have, on the one hand, sufficient independence of thought to weigh my data on its
                own hideously convincing merits or in the light of certain primordial and highly
                baffling myth cycles; and on the other hand, sufficient influence to deter the
                exploring world in general from any rash and over-ambitious program in the region of
                those mountains of madness.It is an unfortunate fact that relatively obscure men like myself and my associates,
                connected only with a small university, have little chance of making an impression
                where matters of a wildly bizarre or highly controversial natures are concerned.It is further against us that we are not, in the strictest sense, specialists in the
                fields which came primarily to be concerned. As a geologist, my object in leading the Miskatonic University Expedition was wholly
                that of securing deep-level specimens of rock and soil from various parts of the
                antarctic continent, aided by the remarkable drill devised by Professor Frank H. Pabodie of our engineering department.I had no wish to be a pioneer in any other field than this, but I did hope that the
                use of this new mechanical appliance at different points along previously explored
                paths would bring to light materials of a sort hitherto unreached by the ordinary
                methods of collection.Pabodie's drilling apparatus, as the public already knows from our reports, was
                unique and radical in its lightness, portability, and capacity to combine the
                ordinary Artesian drill principle with the principle of the small circular rock
                drill in such a way as to cope quickly with strata of varying hardness.Steel head, jointed rods, gasoline motor, collapsible wooden derrick, dynamiting
                paraphernalia, cording, rubbish-removal auger, and sectional piping for bores five
                inches wide and up to one thousand feet deep all formed, with needed accessories, no
                greater load than three seven-dog sledges could carry. This was made possible by the clever aluminum alloy of which most of the metal
                objects were fashioned.Four large Dornier aëroplanes, designed especially for the tremendous altitude flying
                necessary on the antarctic plateau and with added fuel-warming and quick-starting
                devices worked out by Pabodie, could transport our entire expedition from a base at
                the edge of the great ice barrier to various suitable inland points, and from these
                points a sufficient quota of dogs would serve us.We planned to cover as great an area as one antarctic season--or longer, if
                absolutely necessary--would permit, operating mostly in the mountain ranges and on
                the plateau south of Ross Sea; regions explored in varying degree by Shackleton,
                Amundsen, Scott, and Byrd. With frequent changes of camp, made by aëroplane and involving distances great
                enough to be of geological significance, we expected to unearth a quite
                unprecedented amount of material--especially in the pre-Cambrian strata of which so
                narrow a range of antarctic specimens had previously been secured.We wished also to obtain as great as possible a variety of the upper fossiliferous
                rocks, since the primal life history of this bleak realm of ice and death is of the
                highest importance to our knowledge of the earth's past. That the antarctic continent was once temperate and even tropical, with a teeming
                vegetable and animal life of which the lichens, marine fauna, arachnida, and
                penguins of the northern edge are the only survivors, is a matter of common
                information; and we hoped to expand that information in variety, accuracy, and
                detail. When a simple boring revealed fossiliferous signs, we would enlarge the aperture by
                blasting, in order to get specimens of suitable size and condition.Our borings, of varying depth according to the promise held out by the upper soil or
                rock, were to be confined to exposed, or nearly exposed, land surfaces--these
                inevitably being slopes and ridges because of the mile or two-mile thickness of
                solid ice overlying the lower levels.We could not afford to waste drilling depth on any considerable amount of more
                glaciation, though Pabodie had worked out a plan for sinking copper electrodes in
                thick clusters of borings and melting off limited areas of ice with current from a
                gasoline-driven dynamo.It is this plan--which we could not put into effect except experimentally on an
                expedition such as ours--that the coming Starkweather-Moore Expedition proposes to
                follow, despite the warnings I have issued since our return from the antarctic.The public knows of the Miskatonic Expedition through our frequent wireless reports
                to the _Arkham Advertiser_ and Associated Press, and through the later articles by
                Pabodie and myself. We consisted of four men from the University--Pabodie, Lake of the biology
                department, Atwood of the physics department--also a meteorologist--and myself,
                representing geology and having nominal command, also sixteen assistants: seven
                graduate students from Miskatonic and nine skilled mechanics.Of these sixteen, twelve were qualified aëroplane pilots, all but two of whom were
                competent wireless operators. Eight of them understood navigation with compass and sextant, as did Pabodie, Atwood
                and I. In addition, of course, our two ships--wooden exwhalers, reinforced for ice
                conditions and having auxiliary steam--were fully manned.The Nathaniel Derby Pickman Foundation, aided by a few special contributions,
                financed the expedition; hence our preparations were extremely thorough, despite the
                absence of great publicity.The dogs, sledges, machines, camp materials, and unassembled parts of our five planes
                were delivered in Boston, and there our ships were loaded.We were marvelously well-equipped for our specific purposes, and in all matters
                pertaining to supplies, regimen, transportation, and camp construction we profited
                by the excellent example of our many recent and exceptionally brilliant
                predecessors. It was the unusual number and fame of these predecessors which made our own
                expedition--ample though it was--so little noticed by the world at large.As the newspapers told, we sailed from Boston Harbor on September 2nd, 1930, taking a
                leisurely course down the coast and through the Panama Canal, and stopping at Samoa
                and Hobart, Tasmania, at which latter place we took on final supplies.None of our exploring party had ever been in the polar regions before, hence we all
                relied greatly on our ship captains--J. B. Douglas, commanding the brig _Arkham_, and serving as commander of the sea party,
                and Georg Thorfinnssen, commanding the barque _Miskatonic_--both veteran whalers in
                antarctic waters.As we left the inhabited world behind the sun sank lower and lower in the north, and
                stayed longer and longer above the horizon each day. At about 62° South Latitude we sighted our first icebergs--tablelike objects with
                vertical sides--and just before reaching the antarctic circle, which we crossed on
                October 20th with appropriately quaint ceremonies, we were considerably troubled
                with field ice.The falling temperature bothered me considerably after our long voyage through the
                tropics, but I tried to brace up for the worse rigors to come. On many occasions the curious atmospheric effects enchanted me vastly; these
                included a strikingly vivid mirage--the first I had ever seen--in which distant
                bergs became the battlements of unimaginable cosmic castles.Pushing through the ice, which was fortunately neither extensive nor thickly packed,
                we regained open water at South Latitude 67°, East Longitude 175°. On the morning of October 26th a strong land blink appeared on the south, and before
                noon we all felt a thrill of excitement at beholding a vast, lofty, and snow-clad
                mountain chain which opened out and covered the whole vista ahead. At last we had encountered an outpost of the great unknown continent and its cryptic
                world of frozen death.These peaks were obviously the Admiralty Range discovered by Ross, and it would now
                be our task to round Cape Adare and sail down the east coast of Victoria Land to our
                contemplated base on the shore of McMurdo Sound, at the foot of the volcano Erebus
                in South Latitude 77° 9´.The last lap of the voyage was vivid and fancy-stirring. Great barren peaks of mystery loomed up constantly against the west as the low
                northern sun of noon or the still lower horizon-grazing southern sun of midnight
                poured its hazy reddish rays over the white snow, bluish ice and water lanes, and
                black bits of exposed granite slope.Through the desolate summits swept raging, intermittent gusts of the terrible
                antarctic wind, whose cadences sometimes held vague suggestions of a wild and
                half-sentient musical piping, with notes extending over a wide range, and which for
                some subconscious mnemonic reason seemed to me disquieting and even dimly
                terrible.Something about the scene reminded me of the strange and disturbing Asian paintings
                of Nicholas Roerich, and of the still stranger and more disturbing descriptions of
                the evilly fabled plateau of Leng which occur in the dreaded _Necronomicon_ of the
                mad Arab Abdul Alhazred. I was rather sorry, later on, that I had ever looked into that monstrous book at the
                college library.On the 7th of November, sight of the westward range having been temporarily lost, we
                passed Franklin Island; and the next day descried the cones of Mts. Erebus and Terror on Ross Island ahead, with the long line of the Parry Mountains
                beyond. There now stretched off to the east the low, white line of the great ice barrier,
                rising perpendicularly to a height of two hundred feet like the rocky cliffs of
                Quebec, and marking the end of southward navigation.In the afternoon we entered McMurdo Sound and stood off the coast in the lee of
                smoking Mt. Erebus. The scoriaceous peak towered up some twelve thousand seven hundred feet against the
                eastern sky, like a Japanese print of the sacred Fujiyama, while beyond it rose the
                white, ghostlike height of Mt. Terror, ten thousand nine hundred feet in altitude, and now extinct as a
                volcano.Danforth was a great reader of bizarre material, and had talked a good deal of
                Poe. I was interested myself because of the antarctic scene of Poe's only long story--the
                disturbing and enigmatical _Arthur Gordon Pym_. On the barren shore, and on the lofty ice barrier in the background, myriad of
                grotesque penguins squawked and flapped their fins, while many fat seals were
                visible on the water, swimming or sprawling across large cakes of slowly drifting
                ice.Using small boats, we effected a difficult landing on Ross Island shortly after
                midnight, on the morning of the 9th, carrying a line of cable from each of the ships
                and preparing to unload supplies by means of a breeches-buoy arrangement.Our sensations on first treading antarctic soil were poignant and complex, even
                though at this particular point the Scott and Shackleton expeditions had preceded
                us.Our camp on the frozen shore below the volcano's slope was only a provisional one,
                headquarters being kept aboard the _Arkham_. We landed all our drilling apparatus, dogs, sledges, tents, provisions, gasoline
                tanks, experimental ice-melting outfit, cameras, both ordinary and aërial, aëroplane
                parts, and other accessories, including three small portable wireless
                outfits--besides those in the planes--capable of communicating with the _Arkham's_
                large outfit from any part of the antarctic continent that we would be likely to
                visit.The ship's outfit, communicating with the outside world, was to convey press reports
                to the _Arkham Advertiser's_ powerful wireless station on Kingsport Head, Mass. We hoped to complete our work during a single antarctic summer; but if this proved
                impossible we would winter on the _Arkham_, sending the _Miskatonic_ north before
                the freezing of the ice for another summer's supplies.I need not repeat what the newspapers have already published about our early work: of
                our ascent of Mt. Erebus; our successful mineral borings at several points on Ross Island and the
                singular speed with which Pabodie's apparatus accomplished them, even through solid
                rock layers; our provisional test of the small ice-melting equipment; our perilous
                ascent of the great barrier with sledges and supplies; and our final assembling of
                five huge aëroplanes at the camp atop the barrier.The health of our land party--twenty men and fifty-five Alaskan sledge dogs--was
                remarkable, though of course we had so far encountered no really destructive
                temperatures or windstorms.For the most part, the thermometer varied between zero and 20° or 25° above, and our
                experience with New England winters had accustomed us to rigors of this sort. The barrier camp was semipermanent, and destined to be a storage cache for gasoline,
                provisions, dynamite, and other supplies.Only four of our planes were needed to carry the actual exploring material, the fifth
                being left with a pilot and two men, from the ships, at the storage cache to form a
                means of reaching us from the _Arkham_ in case all our exploring planes were
                lost.Later, when not using all the other planes for moving apparatus, we would employ one
                or two in a shuttle transportation service between this cache and another permanent
                base on the great plateau from six hundred to seven hundred miles southward, beyond
                Beardmore Glacier.Despite the almost unanimous accounts of appalling winds and tempests that pour down
                from the plateau, we determined to dispense with intermediate bases, taking our
                chances in the interest of economy and probable efficiency.Wireless reports have spoken of the breathtaking, four-hour, nonstop flight of our
                squadron on November 21st over the lofty shelf ice, with vast peaks rising on the
                west, and the unfathomed silences echoing to the sound of our engines.Wind troubled us only moderately, and our radio compasses helped us through the one
                opaque fog we encountered. When the vast rise loomed ahead, between Latitudes 83° and 84°, we knew we had
                reached Beardmore Glacier, the largest valley glacier in the world, and that the
                frozen sea was now giving place to a frowning and mountainous coast line.At last we were truly entering the white, æon-dead world of the ultimate south. Even as we realized it we saw the peak of Mt. Nansen in the eastern distance, towering up to its height of almost fifteen thousand
                feet.The successful establishment of the southern base above the glacier in Latitude 86°
                7´, East Longitude 174° 23´, and the phenomenally rapid and effective borings and
                blastings made at various points reached by our sledge trips and short aëroplane
                flights, are matters of history; as is the arduous and triumphant ascent of Mt. Nansen by Pabodie and two of the graduate students--Gedney and Carroll--on December
                13th to 15th.We were some eight thousand five hundred feet above sea-level. When experimental drillings revealed solid ground only twelve feet down through the
                snow and ice at certain points, we made considerable use of the small melting
                apparatus and sunk bores and performed dynamiting at many places, where no previous
                explorer had ever thought of securing mineral specimens.The pre-Cambrian granites and beacon sandstones thus obtained confirmed our belief
                that this plateau was homogeneous, with the great bulk of the continent to the west,
                but somewhat different from the parts lying eastward below South America--which we
                then thought to form a separate and smaller continent divided from the larger one by
                a frozen junction of Ross and Weddell Seas, though Byrd has since disproved the
                report.In certain of the sandstones, dynamited and chiseled after boring revealed their
                nature, we found some highly interesting fossil markings and fragments; notably
                ferns, seaweeds, trilobites, crinoids, and such mollusks as linguellæ and
                gastropods--all of which seemed of real significance in connection with the region's
                primordial history. There was also a queer triangular, striated marking, about a foot in greatest
                diameter, which Lake pieced together from three fragments of slate brought up from a
                deep-blasted aperture.These fragments came from a point to the westward, near the Queen Alexandra Range;
                and Lake, as a biologist, seemed to find their curious marking unusually puzzling
                and provocative, though to my geological eye it looked not unlike some of the ripple
                effects reasonably common in the sedimentary rocks.Since slate is no more than a metamorphic formation into which a sedimentary stratum
                is pressed, and since the pressure itself produces odd distorting effects on any
                markings which may exist, I saw no reason for extreme wonder over the striated
                depression.On January 6, 1931, Lake, Pabodie, Daniels, all six of the students, four mechanics,
                and myself flew directly over the south pole in two of the great planes, being
                forced down once by a sudden high wind, which, fortunately, did not develop into a
                typical storm. This was, as the papers have stated, one of several observation flights, during
                others of which we tried to discern new topographical features in areas unreached by
                previous explorers.Our early flights were disappointing in this latter respect, though they afforded us
                some magnificent examples of the richly fantastic and deceptive mirages of the polar
                regions, of which our sea voyage had given us some brief foretastes.Distant mountains floated in the sky as enchanted cities, and often the whole white
                world would dissolve into a gold, silver, and scarlet land of Dunsanian dreams and
                adventurous expectancy under the magic of the low midnight sun.On cloudy days we had considerable trouble in flying, owing to the tendency of snowy
                earth and sky to merge into one mystical opalescent void with no visible horizon to
                mark the junction of the two.At length we resolved to carry out our original plan of flying five hundred miles
                eastward with all four exploring planes and establishing a fresh sub-base at a point
                which would probably be on the smaller continental division, as we mistakenly
                conceived it. Geological specimens obtained there would be desirable for purposes of
                comparison.Our health so far had remained excellent--lime juice well offsetting the steady diet
                of tinned and salted food, and temperatures generally above zero enabling us to do
                without our thickest furs.It was now midsummer, and with haste and care we might be able to conclude work by
                March and avoid a tedious wintering through the long antarctic night. Several savage windstorms had burst upon us from the west, but we had escaped damage
                through the skill of Atwood in devising rudimentary aëroplane shelters and
                windbreaks of heavy snow blocks, and in reinforcing the principal camp buildings
                with snow. Our good luck and efficiency had indeed been almost uncanny.The outside world knew, of course, of our program, and was told also of Lake's
                strange and dogged insistence on a westward--or rather, northwestward--prospecting
                trip before our radical shift to the new base.It seems that he had pondered a great deal and with alarmingly radical daring over
                that triangular striated marking in the slate; reading into it certain
                contradictions in nature and geological period which whetted his curiosity to the
                utmost, and made him avid to sink more borings and blastings in the west-stretching
                formation to which the exhumed fragments evidently belonged.He was strangely convinced that the marking was the print of some bulky, unknown, and
                radically unclassifiable organism of considerably advanced evolution,
                notwithstanding that the rock which bore it was of so vastly ancient a
                date--Cambrian if not actually pre-Cambrian--as to preclude the probable existence
                not only of all highly evolved life, but of any life at all above the unicellular or
                at most the trilobite stage. These fragments, with their odd marking, must have been five hundred million to a
                thousand million years old. II.Popular imagination, I judge, responded actively to our wireless bulletins of Lake's
                start northwestward into regions never trodden by human foot or penetrated by human
                imagination, though we did not mention his wild hopes of revolutionizing the entire
                sciences of biology and geology.His preliminary sledging and boring journey of January 11th to 18th with Pabodie and
                five others--marred by the loss of two dogs in an upset when crossing one of the
                great pressure ridges in the ice--had brought up more and more of the Archæan slate;
                and even I was interested by the singular profusion of evident fossil markings in
                that unbelievably ancient stratum.These markings, however, were of very primitive life forms involving no great paradox
                except that any life forms should occur in rock as definitely pre-Cambrian as this
                seemed to be; hence I still failed to see the good sense of Lake's demand for an
                interlude in our time-saving program--an interlude requiring the use of all four
                planes, many men, and the whole of the expedition's mechanical apparatus.I did not, in the end, veto the plan, though I decided not to accompany the
                northwestward party despite Lake's plea for my geological advice. While they were gone, I would remain at the base with Pabodie and five men and work
                out final plans for the eastward shift. In preparation for this transfer, one of the planes had begun to move up a good
                gasoline supply from McMurdo Sound; but this could wait temporarily. I kept with me one sledge and nine dogs, since it is unwise to be at any time
                without possible transportation in an utterly tenantless world of æon-long
                death.Lake's subexpedition into the unknown, as every one will recall, sent out its own
                reports from the short-wave transmitters on the planes; these being simultaneously
                picked up by our apparatus at the southern base and by the _Arkham_ at McMurdo
                Sound, whence they were relayed to the outside world on wave lengths up to fifty
                meters.The start was made January 22nd at 4 a.m.; and the first wireless message we received came only two hours later, when Lake
                spoke of descending and starting a small-scale ice-melting and bore at a point some
                three hundred miles away from us. Six hours after that a second and very excited message told of the frantic,
                beaverlike work whereby a shallow shaft had been sunk and blasted, culminating in
                the discovery of slate fragments with several markings approximately like the one
                which had caused the original puzzlement.Three hours later a brief bulletin announced the resumption of the flight in the
                teeth of a raw and piercing gale; and when I dispatched a message of protest against
                further hazards, Lake replied curtly that his new specimens made any hazard worth
                taking.I saw that his excitement had reached the point of mutiny, and that I could do
                nothing to check this headlong risk of the whole expedition's success; but it was
                appalling to think of his plunging deeper and deeper into that treacherous and
                sinister white immensity of tempests and unfathomed mysteries which stretched off
                for some fifteen hundred miles to the half-known, half-suspected coast line of Queen
                Mary and Knox Lands.After that Pabodie, the men, and I hung breathlessly over the receiver.
                Thought of this titanic mountain rampart seven hundred miles away inflamed our
                deepest sense of adventure; and we rejoiced that our expedition, if not ourselves
                personally, had been its discoverers.Though it was technically sleeping time, not one of us listeners thought for a
                moment of retiring. It must have been a good deal the same at McMurdo Sound,
                where the supply cache and the _Arkham_ were also getting the messages; for Captain
                Douglas gave out a call congratulating everybody on the important find, and Sherman,
                the cache operator, seconded his sentiments. We were sorry, of course, about
                the damaged aëroplane, but hoped it could be easily mended. Then, at eleven
                p.m.From then on for another half hour Lake kept up a running fire of comment, and
                expressed his intention of climbing some of the peaks on foot. I replied that I would join him as soon as he could send a plane, and that Pabodie
                and I would work out the best gasoline plan--just where and how to concentrate our
                supply in view of the expedition's altered character.Obviously, Lake's boring operations, as well as his aëroplane activities, would need
                a great deal delivered at the new base which he was to establish at the foot of the
                mountains; and it was possible that the eastward flight might not be made, after
                all, this season. In connection with this business I called Captain Douglas and asked him to get as
                much as possible out of the ships and up the barrier with the single dog team we had
                left there. A direct route across the unknown region between Lake and McMurdo Sound was what we
                really ought to establish.Lake called me later to say that he had decided to let the camp stay where Moulton's
                plane had been forced down, and where repairs had already progressed somewhat. The ice sheet was very thin, with dark ground here and there visible, and he would
                sink some borings and blasts at that very point before making any sledge trips or
                climbing expeditions.He spoke of the ineffable majesty of the whole scene, and the queer state of his
                sensations at being in the lee of vast, silent pinnacles, whose ranks shot up like a
                wall reaching the sky at the world's rim.[Illustration: _It was a queer state of sensations--being in the lee of vast,
                silent pinnacles, where ranks shot up like a wall reaching the sky at the world's
                rim.Atwood's theodolite observations had placed the height of the five tallest peaks at
                from thirty thousand to thirty-four thousand feet.The windswept nature of the terrain clearly disturbed Lake, for it argued the
                occasional existence of prodigious gales, violent beyond anything we had so far
                encountered. His camp lay a little more than five miles from where the higher foothills rose
                abruptly.I could almost trace a note of subconscious alarm in his words--flashed across a
                glacial void of seven hundred miles--as he urged that we all hasten with the matter
                and get the strange, new region disposed of as soon as possible. He was about to rest now, after a continuous day's work of almost unparalleled
                speed, strenuousness, and results.In the morning I had a three-cornered wireless talk with Lake and Captain Douglas at
                their widely separated bases. It was agreed that one of Lake's planes would come to my base for Pabodie, the five
                men, and myself, as well as for all the fuel it could carry. The rest of the fuel question, depending on our decision about an easterly trip,
                could wait for a few days, since Lake had enough for immediate camp heat and
                borings.Eventually the old southern base ought to be restocked, but if we postponed the
                easterly trip we would not use it till the next summer, and, meanwhile, Lake must
                send a plane to explore a direct route between his new mountains and McMurdo
                Sound.Pabodie and I prepared to close our base for a short or long period, as the case
                might be. If we wintered in the antarctic we would probably fly straight from Lake's base to
                the _Arkham_ without returning to this spot. Some of our conical tents had already been reinforced by blocks of hard snow, and
                now we decided to complete the job of making a permanent village. Owing to a very liberal tent supply, Lake had with him all that his base would need,
                even after our arrival. I wirelessed that Pabodie and I would be ready for the northwestward move after one
                day's work and one night's rest.Our labors, however, were not very steady after four p.m., for about that time Lake began sending in the most extraordinary and excited
                messages. His working day had started unpropitiously, since an aëroplane survey of the nearly
                exposed rock surfaces showed an entire absence of those Archæan and primordial
                strata for which he was looking, and which formed so great a part of the colossal
                peaks that loomed up at a tantalizing distance from the camp.Most of the rocks glimpsed were apparently Jurassic and Comanchean sandstones and
                Permian and Triassic schists, with now and then a glossy black outcropping
                suggesting a hard and slaty coal.This rather discouraged Lake, whose plans all hinged on unearthing specimens more
                than five hundred million years older. It was clear to him that in order to recover the Archæan slate vein in which he had
                found the odd markings, he would have to make a long sledge trip from these
                foothills to the steep slopes of the gigantic mountains themselves.He had resolved, nevertheless, to do some local boring as part of the expedition's
                general program; hence, he set up the drill and put five men to work with it while
                the rest finished settling the camp and repairing the damaged aëroplane. The softest visible rock--a sandstone about a quarter of a mile from the camp--had
                been chosen for the first sampling; and the drill made excellent progress without
                much supplementary blasting.It was about three hours afterward, following the first really heavy blast of the
                operation, that the shouting of the drill crew was heard; and that young Gedney--the
                acting foreman--rushed into the camp with the startling news.They had struck a cave. Early in the boring the sandstone had given place to a vein of Comanchean limestone,
                full of minute fossil cephalopods, corals, echini, and spirifera, and with
                occasional suggestions of siliceous sponges and marine vertebrate bones--the latter
                probably of teliosts, sharks, and ganoids.This, in itself, was important enough, as affording the first vertebrate fossils the
                expedition had yet secured; but when shortly afterward the drill head dropped
                through the stratum into apparent vacancy, a wholly new and doubly intense wave of
                excitement spread among the excavators.A good-sized blast had laid open the subterrane secret; and now, through a jagged
                aperture perhaps five feet across and three feet thick, there yawned before the avid
                searchers a section of shallow limestone hollowing worn more than fifty million
                years ago by the trickling ground waters of a bygone tropic world.The hollowed layer was not more than seven or eight feet deep, but extended off
                indefinitely in all directions and had a fresh, slightly moving air which suggested
                its membership in an extensive subterranean system. Its roof and floor were abundantly equipped with large stalactites and stalagmites,
                some of which met in columnar form.But important above all else was the vast deposit of shells and bones, which in
                places nearly choked the passage. Washed down from unknown jungles of Mesozoic tree ferns and fungi, and forests of
                Tertiary cycads, fan palms, and primitive angiosperms, this osseous medley contained
                representatives of more Cretaceous, Eocene, and other animal species than the
                greatest palæontologist could have counted or classified in a year. Mollusks, crustacean armor, fishes, amphibians, reptiles, birds, and early
                mammals--great and small, known and unknown.No wonder Gedney ran back to the camp shouting, and no wonder every one else dropped
                work and rushed headlong through the biting cold to where the tall derrick marked a
                new-found gateway to secrets of inner earth and vanished æons.When Lake had satisfied the first keen edge of his curiosity he scribbled a message
                in his notebook and had young Moulton run back to the camp to dispatch it by
                wireless.This was my first word of the discovery, and it told of the identification of early
                shells, bones of ganoids and placoderms, remnants of labyrinthodonta and thecoiidea,
                great mosasaur skull fragments, dinosaur vertebræ and armor plates, pterodactyl
                teeth and wing bones, Archaeopteryx débris, Miocene sharks' teeth, primitive bird
                skulls, and other bones of archaic mammals such as Palæotheres, Xiphodons, Eohippi,
                Oreodons, and Titanotheriidæ.There was nothing as recent as a mastodon, elephant, true camel, deer, or bovine
                animal; hence Lake concluded that the last deposits had occurred during the
                Oligocene Age, and that the hollowed stratum had lain in its present dried, dead,
                and inaccessible state for at least thirty million years.On the other hand, the prevalence of very early life forms was singular in the
                highest degree. Though the limestone formation was, on the evidence of such typical imbedded fossils
                as ventriculites, positively and unmistakably Comanchean and not a particle earlier;
                the free fragments in the hollow space included a surprising proportion from
                organisms hitherto considered as peculiar to far older periods--even rudimentary
                fishes, mollusks, and corals as remote as the Silurian or Ordovician.The inevitable inference was that in this part of the world there had been a
                remarkable and unique degree of continuity between the life of over three hundred
                million years ago and that of only thirty million years ago. How far this continuity had extended beyond the Oligocene Age when the cavern was
                closed was of course past all speculation.In any event, the coming of the frightful ice in the Pleistocene some five hundred
                thousand years ago--a mere yesterday as compared with the age of this cavity--must
                have put an end to any of the primal forms which had locally managed to outlive
                their common terms.Lake was not content to let his first message stand, but had another bulletin written
                and dispatched across the snow to the camp before Moulton could get back. After that Moulton stayed at the wireless in one of the planes, transmitting to
                me--and to the _Arkham_ for relaying to the outside world--the frequent postscripts
                which Lake sent him by a succession of messengers.Those who followed the newspapers will remember the excitement created among men of
                science by that afternoon's reports--reports which have finally led, after all these
                years, to the organization of that very Starkweather-Moore Expedition which I am so
                anxious to dissuade from its purposes. Fowler makes discovery of highest importance in sandstone and limestone fragments
                from blasts. Several distinct triangular striated prints like those in archæan slate, proving
                that source survived from over six hundred million years ago to Comanchean times
                without more than moderate morphological changes and decrease in average size. Comanchean prints apparently more primitive or decadent, if anything, than older
                ones. Emphasize importance of discovery in press. Will mean to biology what Einstein has meant to mathematics and physics. Joins up with my previous work and amplifies conclusions. Appears to indicate, as I suspected, that earth has seen whole cycle or cycles of
                organic life before known one that begins with Archæozoic cells. Was evolved and specialized not later than a thousand million years ago, when planet
                was young and recently uninhabitable for any life forms of normal protoplasmic
                structure. Question arises when, where, and how development took place. Later. Examining certain skeletal fragments of large land and marine saurians and primitive
                mammals, find singular local wounds or injuries to bony structure not attributable
                to any known predatory or carnivorous animal of any period. Of two sorts--straight, penetrant bores, and apparently hacking incisions. One or two cases of cleanly severed bones. Not many specimens affected. Am sending to camp for electric torches. Will extend search area underground by hacking away stalactites. Still later. Have found peculiar soapstone fragment about six inches across and an inch and a
                half thick, wholly unlike any visible local formation--greenish, but no evidences to
                place its period. Has curious smoothness and regularity. Shaped like five-pointed star with tips broken off, and signs of other cleavage at
                inward angles and in center of surface. Small, smooth depression in center of unbroken surface. Arouses much curiosity as to source and weathering. Probably some freak of water action. Carroll, with magnifier, thinks he can make out additional markings of geologic
                significance. Groups of tiny dots in regular patterns. Dogs growing uneasy as we work, and seem to hate this soapstone. Must see if it has any peculiar odor. Will report again when Mills gets back with light and we start on underground
                area. 10:15 p.m. Important discovery. Orrendorf and Watkins, working underground at 9:45 with light, found monstrous
                barrel-shaped fossil of wholly unknown nature; probably vegetable unless overgrown
                specimen of unknown marine radiata. Tissue evidently preserved by mineral salts. Tough as leather, but astonishing flexibility retained in places. Marks of broken-off parts at ends and around sides. Six feet end to end, three and five tenths feet central diameter, tapering to one
                foot at each end. Like a barrel with five bulging ridges in place of staves. Lateral breakages, as of thinnish stalks, are at equator in middle of these
                ridges. In furrows between ridges are curious growths--combs or wings that fold up and
                spread out like fans. All greatly damaged but one, which gives almost seven-foot wing spread. Arrangement reminds one of certain monsters of primal myth, especially fabled Elder
                Things in _Necronomicon_. These wings seem to be membranous, stretched on framework of glandular tubing. Apparent minute orifices in frame tubing at wing tips. Ends of body shriveled, giving no clue to interior or to what has been broken off
                there. Must dissect when we get back to camp. Can't decide whether vegetable or animal. Many features obviously of almost incredible primitiveness. Have set all hands cutting stalactites and looking for further specimens. Additional scarred bones found, but these must wait. Having trouble with dogs. They can't endure the new specimen, and would probably tear it to pieces if we
                didn't keep it at a distance from them. 11:30 p.m. Attention, Dyer, Pabodie, Douglas. Matter of highest--I might say transcendent--importance. _Arkham_ must relay to Kingsport Head Station at once. Strange barrel growth is the archæan thing that left prints in rocks. Mills, Boudreau, and Fowler discover cluster of thirteen more at underground point
                forty feet from aperture. Mixed with curiously rounded and configured soapstone fragments smaller than one
                previously found--star-shaped, but no marks of breakage except at some of the
                points. Of organic specimens, eight apparently perfect, with all appendages. Have brought all to surface, leading off dogs to distance. They cannot stand the things. Give close attention to description and repeat back for accuracy. Papers must get this right. Objects are eight feet long all over. Six-foot, five-ridged barrel torso three and five tenths feet central diameter, one
                foot end diameters. Dark gray, flexible, and infinitely tough. Seven-foot membranous wings of same color, found folded, spread out of furrows
                between ridges. Wing framework tubular or glandular, or lighter gray, with orifices at wing
                tips. Spread wings have serrated edge. Around equator, one at central apex of each of the five vertical, stavelike ridges,
                are five systems of light-gray flexible arms or tentacles found tightly folded to
                torso but expansible to maximum length of over three feet. Like arms of primitive crinoid. Single stalks three inches diameter branch after six inches into five substalks,
                each of which branches after eight inches into five small, tapering tentacles or
                tendrils, giving each stalk a total of twenty-five tentacles. At top of torso blunt, bulbous neck of lighter gray, with gill-like suggestions,
                holds yellowish five-pointed starfish-shaped apparent head covered with three-inch
                wiry cilia of various prismatic colors. Head thick and puffy, about two feet point to point, with three-inch flexible
                yellowish tubes projecting from each point. Slit in exact center of top probably breathing aperture. At end of each tube is spherical expansion where yellowish membrane rolls back on
                handling to reveal glassy, red-irised globe, evidently an eye. Five slightly longer reddish tubes start from inner angles of starfish-shaped head
                and end in saclike swellings of same color which, upon pressure, open to bell-shaped
                orifices two inches maximum diameter and lined with sharp, white tooth-like
                projections--probable mouths. All these tubes, cilia, and points of starfish head, found folded tightly down;
                tubes and points clinging to bulbous neck and torso. Flexibility surprising despite vast toughness. At bottom of torso, rough but dissimilarly functioning counterparts of head
                arrangements exist. Bulbous light-gray pseudoneck, without gill suggestions, holds greenish five-pointed
                starfish arrangement. Tough, muscular arms four feet long and tapering from seven inches diameter at base
                to about two and five tenths at point. To each point is attached small end of a greenish five-veined membranous triangle
                eight inches long and six wide at farther end. This is the paddle, fin, or pseudofoot which had made prints in rocks from a
                thousand million to fifty or sixty million years old. From inner angles of starfish arrangement project two-foot reddish tubes tapering
                from three inches diameter at base to one at tip. Orifices at tips. All these parts infinitely tough and leathery, but extremely flexible. Four-foot arms with paddles undoubtedly used for locomotion of some sort, marine or
                otherwise. When moved, display suggestions of exaggerated muscularity. As found, all these projections tightly folded over pseudoneck and end of torso,
                corresponding to projections at other end. Cannot yet assign positively to animal or vegetable kingdom, but odds now favor
                animal. Probably represents incredibly advanced evolution of radiata without loss of certain
                primitive features. Echinoderm resemblances unmistakable despite local contradictory evidences. Wing structure puzzles in view of probable marine habitat, but may have use in water
                navigation. Symmetry is curiously vegetablelike, suggesting vegetable's essential up-and-down
                structure rather than animal's fore-and-aft structure. Fabulously early date of evolution, preceding even simplest archæan Protozoa
                hitherto known, baffles all conjecture as to origin. Complete specimens have such uncanny resemblance to certain creatures of primal myth
                that suggestion of ancient existence outside antarctic becomes inevitable. Dyer and Pabodie have read _Necronomicon_ and seen Clark Ashton Smith's nightmare
                paintings based on text, and will understand when I speak of Elder Things supposed
                to have created all earth life as jest or mistake. Students have always thought conception formed from morbid imaginative treatment of
                very ancient tropical radiata. Also like prehistoric folklore things Wilmarth has spoken of--Cthulhu cult
                appendages, etc. Vast field of study opened. Deposits probably of late Cretaceous or early Eocene period, judging from associated
                specimens. Massive stalagmites deposited above them. Hard work hewing out, but toughness prevented damage. State of preservation miraculous, evidently owing to limestone action. No more found so far, but will resume search later. Job now to get fourteen huge specimens to camp without dogs, which bark furiously
                and can't be trusted near them. With nine men--three left to guard the dogs--we ought to manage the three sledges
                fairly well, though wind is bad. Must establish plane communication with McMurdo Sound and begin shipping
                material. But I've got to dissect one of these things before we take any rest. Wish I had a real laboratory here. Dyer better kick himself for having tried to stop my westward trip. First the world's greatest mountains, and then this. If this last isn't the high spot of the expedition, I don't know what is. We're made scientifically. Congrats, Pabodie, on the drill that opened up the cave. Now will _Arkham_ please repeat description?The sensations of Pabodie and myself at receipt of this report were almost beyond
                description, nor were our companions much behind us in enthusiasm. McTighe, who had hastily translated a few high spots as they came from the droning
                receiving set, wrote out the entire message from his shorthand version, as soon as
                Lake's operator signed off.All appreciated the epoch-making significance of the discovery, and I sent Lake
                congratulations as soon as the _Arkham's_ operator had repeated back the descriptive
                parts as requested; and my example was followed by Sherman from his station at the
                McMurdo Sound supply cache, as well as by Captain Douglas of the _Arkham_.Later, as head of the expedition, I added some remarks to be relayed through the
                _Arkham_ to the outside world. Of course, rest was an absurd thought amidst this excitement; and my only wish was
                to get to Lake's camp as quickly as I could. It disappointed me when he sent word that a rising mountain gale made early aërial
                travel impossible.But within an hour and a half interest again rose to banish disappointment. Lake, sending more messages, told of the completely successful transportation of the
                fourteen great specimens to the camp. It had been a hard pull, for the things were surprisingly heavy; but nine men had
                accomplished it very neatly. Now some of the party were hurriedly building a snow corral at a safe distance from
                the camp, to which the dogs could be brought for greater convenience in feeding. The specimens were laid out on the hard snow near the camp, save for one on which
                Lake was making crude attempts at dissection.This dissection seemed to be a greater task than had been expected, for, despite the
                heat of a gasoline stove in the newly raised laboratory tent, the deceptively
                flexible tissues of the chosen specimen--a powerful and intact one--lost nothing of
                their more than leathery toughness. Lake was puzzled as to how he might make the requisite incisions without violence
                destructive enough to upset all the structural niceties he was looking for.He had, it is true, seven more perfect specimens; but these were too few to use up
                recklessly unless the cave might later yield an unlimited supply. Accordingly, he removed the specimen and dragged in one which, though having
                remnants of the starfish arrangements at both ends, was badly crushed and partly
                disrupted along one of the great torso furrows.Results, quickly reported over the wireless, were baffling and provocative
                indeed. Nothing like delicacy or accuracy was possible with instruments hardly able to cut
                the anomalous tissue, but the little that was achieved left us all awed and
                bewildered.Existing biology would have to be wholly revised, for this thing was no product of
                any cell growth science knows about. There had been scarcely any mineral replacement, and despite an age of perhaps forty
                million years the internal organs were wholly intact.The leathery, undeteriorative, and almost indestructible quality was an inherent
                attribute of the thing's form of organization, and pertained to some paleocene cycle
                of invertebrate evolution utterly beyond our powers of speculation.At first all that Lake found was dry, but as the heated tent produced its thawing
                effect, organic moisture of pungent and offensive odor was encountered toward the
                thing's uninjured side. It was not blood, but a thick, dark-green fluid apparently answering the same
                purpose. By the time Lake reached this stage all thirty-seven dogs had been brought to the
                still uncompleted corral near the camp, and even at that distance set up a savage
                barking and show of restlessness at the acrid, diffusive smell.Far from helping to place the strange entity, this provisional dissection merely
                deepened its mystery. All guesses about its external members had been correct, and on the evidence of
                these one could hardly hesitate to call the thing animal, but internal inspection
                brought up so many vegetable evidences that Lake was left hopelessly at sea. It had digestion and circulation, and eliminated waste matter through the reddish
                tubes of its starfish-shaped base.Cursorily, one would say that its respiratory apparatus handled oxygen rather than
                carbon dioxide; and there were odd evidences of air-storage chambers and methods of
                shifting respiration from the external orifice to at least two other fully developed
                breathing systems--gills and pores.Clearly, it was amphibian and probably adapted to long airless hibernation periods as
                well. Vocal organs seemed present in connection with the main respiratory system, but they
                presented anomalies beyond immediate solution. Articulate speech, in the sense of syllable utterance, seemed barely conceivable,
                but musical piping notes covering a wide range were highly probable. The muscular system was almost pre-naturally developed.The nervous system was so complex and highly developed as to leave Lake aghast. Though excessively primitive and archaic in some respects, the thing had a set of
                gangliar centers and connectives arguing the very extremes of specialized
                development.Its five-lobed brain was surprisingly advanced, and there were signs of a sensory
                equipment, served in part through the wiry cilia of the head, involving factors
                alien to any other terrestrial organism. Probably it had more than five senses, so that its habits could not be predicted
                from any existing analogy.It must, Lake thought, have been a creature of keen sensitiveness and delicately
                differentiated functions in its primal world--much like the ants and bees of
                to-day. It reproduced like the vegetable cryptogams, especially the pteridophyta; having
                spore cases at the tips of the wings and evidently developing from a thallus or
                prothallus.But to give it a name at this stage was mere folly. It looked like a radiate, but was clearly something more. It was partly vegetable, but had three fourths of the essentials of animal
                structure. That it was marine in origin, its symmetrical contour and certain other attributes
                clearly indicated; yet one could not be exact as to the limit of its later
                adaptations.The wings, after all, held a persistent suggestion of the aërial. How it could have undergone its tremendously complex evolution on a new-born earth
                in time to leave prints in archæan rocks was so far beyond conception as to make
                Lake whimsically recall the primal myths about Great Old Ones who filtered down from
                the stars and concocted earth life as a joke or mistake; and the wild tales of
                cosmic hill things from outside told by a folklorist colleague in Miskatonic's
                English department.Naturally, he considered the possibility of the pre-Cambrian prints having been made
                by a less evolved ancestor of the present specimens, but quickly rejected this
                too-facile theory upon considering the advanced structural qualities of the older
                fossils. If anything, the later contours showed decadence rather than higher evolution.The size of the pseudofeet had decreased, and the whole morphology seemed coarsened
                and simplified. Moreover, the nerves and organs, just examined, held singular
                suggestions of retrogression from forms still more complex. Atrophied and
                vestigial parts were surprisingly prevalent.At about two-thirty a.m., having decided to postpone further work and get a little rest, he covered the
                dissected organism with a tarpaulin, emerged from the laboratory tent, and studied
                the intact specimens with renewed interest.The ceaseless antarctic sun had begun to limber up their tissues a trifle, so that
                the head points and tubes of two or three showed signs of unfolding; but Lake did
                not believe there was any danger of immediate decomposition in the almost subzero
                air. He did, however, move all the undissected specimens closer together and throw a
                spare tent over them in order to keep off the direct solar rays. That would also help to keep their possible scent away from the dogs, whose hostile
                unrest was really becoming a problem, even at their substantial distance and behind
                the higher and higher snow walls, which an increased quota of the men were hastening
                to raise around their quarters.He had to weight down the corners of the tent cloth with heavy blocks of snow to hold
                it in place amidst the rising gale, for the titan mountains seemed about to deliver
                some gravely severe blasts. Early apprehensions about sudden antarctic winds were revived, and under Atwood's
                supervision precautions were taken to bank the tents, new dog corral, and crude
                aëroplane shelters with snow, on the mountainward side. These latter shelters, begun with hard snow blocks during odd moments, were by no
                means as high as they should have been; and Lake finally detached all hands from
                other tasks to work on them.It was after four when Lake at last prepared to sign off and advised us all to share
                the rest period his outfit would take when the shelter walls were a little
                higher. He held some friendly chat with Pabodie over the ether, and repeated his praise of
                the really marvelous drills that had helped him make his discovery. Atwood also sent greetings and praises.I gave Lake a warm word of congratulation, owning up that he was right about the
                western trip, and we all agreed to get in touch by wireless at ten in the
                morning. If the gale was then over, Lake would send a plane for the party at my base. Just before retiring I dispatched a final message to the _Arkham_, with instructions
                about toning down the day's news for the outside world, since the full details
                seemed radical enough to rouse a wave of incredulity until further
                substantiated. III.None of us, I imagine, slept very heavily or continuously that morning. Both the excitement of Lake's discovery and the mounting fury of the wind were
                against such a thing. So savage was the blast even where we were, that we could not help wondering how
                much worse it was at Lake's camp, directly under the vast unknown peaks that bred
                and delivered it.McTighe was awake at ten o'clock and tried to get Lake on the wireless, as agreed,
                but some electrical condition in the disturbed air to the westward seemed to prevent
                communication. We did, however, get the _Arkham_, and Douglas told me that he had likewise been
                vainly trying to reach Lake. He had not known about the wind, for very little was blowing at McMurdo Sound,
                despite its persistent rage where we were.Throughout the day we all listened anxiously and tried to get Lake at intervals, but
                invariably without results. About noon a positive frenzy of wind stampeded out of the west, causing us to fear
                for the safety of our camp; but it eventually died down, with only a moderate
                relapse at two p.m.After three o'clock it was very quiet, and we redoubled our efforts to get Lake. Reflecting that he had four planes, each provided with an excellent short-wave
                outfit, we could not imagine any ordinary accident capable of crippling all his
                wireless equipment at once. Nevertheless, the stony silence continued, and when we thought of the delirious
                force the wind must have had in his locality we could not help making the most
                direful conjectures.By six o'clock our fears had become intense and definite, and after a wireless
                consultation with Douglas and Thorfinnssen I resolved to take steps toward
                investigation. The fifth aëroplane, which we had left at the McMurdo Sound supply cache with
                Sherman and two sailors, was in good shape and ready for instant use, and it seemed
                that the very emergency for which it had been saved was now upon us.I got Sherman by wireless and ordered him to join me with the plane and the two
                sailors at the southern base as quickly as possible, the air conditions being
                apparently highly favorable. We then talked over the personnel of the coming investigation party, and decided
                that we would include all hands, together with the sledge and dogs which I had kept
                with me. Even so great a load would not be too much for one of the huge planes built to our
                special orders for heavy machinery transportation. At intervals I still tried to reach Lake with the wireless, but all to no
                purpose.Sherman, with the sailors Gunnarsson and Larsen, took off at seven thirty; and
                reported a quiet flight from several points on the wing. They arrived at our base at midnight, and all hands at once discussed the next
                move. It was risky business sailing over the antarctic in a single aëroplane without any
                line of bases, but no one drew back from what seemed like the plainest
                necessity. We turned in at two o'clock for a brief rest after some preliminary loading of the
                plane, but were up again in four hours to finish the loading and packing.At seven fifteen a.m., January 25th, we started northwestward under McTighe's pilotage with ten men, seven
                dogs, a sledge, a fuel and food supply, and other items including the plane's
                wireless outfit. The atmosphere was clear, fairly quiet, and relatively mild in temperature, and we
                anticipated very little trouble in reaching the latitude and longitude designated by
                Lake as the site of his camp. Our apprehensions were over what we might find, or fail to find, at the end of our
                journey, for silence continued to answer all calls dispatched to the camp.Every incident of that four-and-a-half-hour flight is burned into my recollection
                because of its crucial position in my life. It marked my loss, at the age of fifty-four, of all that peace and balance which the
                normal mind possesses through its accustomed conception of external nature and
                nature's laws.Thenceforward the ten of us--but the student Danforth and myself above all
                others--were to face a hideously amplified world of lurking horrors which nothing
                can erase from our emotions, and which we would refrain from sharing with mankind in
                general if we could. The newspapers have printed the bulletins we sent from the moving plane, telling of
                our nonstop course, our two battles with treacherous upper-air gales, our glimpse of
                the broken surface where Lake had sunk his mid-journey shaft three days before, and
                our sight of a group of those strange fluffy snow cylinders noted by Amundsen and
                Byrd as rolling in the wind across the endless leagues of frozen plateau.There came a point, though, when our sensations could not be conveyed in any words
                the press would understand, and a later point when we had to adopt an actual rule of
                strict censorship.The sailor Larsen was first to spy the jagged line of witchlike cones and pinnacles
                ahead, and his shouts sent every one to the windows of the great cabined plane. Despite our speed, they were very slow in gaining prominence; hence we knew that
                they must be infinitely far off, and visible only because of their abnormal
                height.Little by little, however, they rose grimly into the western sky, allowing us to
                distinguish various bare, bleak, blackish summits, and to catch the curious sense of
                phantasy which they inspired as seen in the reddish antarctic light against the
                provocative background of iridescent ice-dust clouds.In the whole spectacle there was a persistent, pervasive hint of stupendous secrecy
                and potential revelation. It was as if these stark, nightmare spires marked the pylons of a frightful gateway
                into forbidden spheres of dream, and complex gulfs of remote time, space, and
                ultradimensionality. I could not help feeling that they were evil things--mountains of madness whose
                farther slopes looked out over some accursed ultimate abyss.That seething, half-luminous cloud background held ineffable suggestions of a vague,
                ethereal beyondness far more than terrestrially spatial, and gave appalling
                reminders of the utter remoteness, separateness, desolation, and æon-long death of
                this untrodden and unfathomed austral world.It was young Danforth who drew our notice to the curious regularities of the higher
                mountain sky line--regularities like clinging fragments of perfect cubes, which Lake
                had mentioned in his messages, and which indeed justified his comparison with the
                dreamlike suggestions of primordial temple ruins, on cloudy Asian mountaintops so
                subtly and strangely painted by Roerich.There was indeed something hauntingly Roerichlike about this whole unearthly
                continent of mountainous mystery. I had felt it in October when we first caught sight of Victoria Land, and I felt it
                afresh now. I felt, too, another wave of uneasy consciousness of archæan mythical resemblances,
                of how disturbingly this lethal realm corresponded to the evilly famed plateau of
                Leng in the primal writings.Mythologists have placed Leng in Central Asia, but the racial memory of man--or of
                his predecessors--is long, and it may well be that certain tales have come down from
                lands and mountains and temples of horror earlier than Asia and earlier than any
                human world we know.A few daring mystics have hinted at a pre-Pleistocene origin for the fragmentary
                Pnakotic Manuscripts, and have suggested that the devotees of Tsathoggua were as
                alien to mankind as Tsathoggua itself.Leng, wherever in space or time it might brood, was not a region I would care to be
                in or near, nor did I relish the proximity of a world that had ever bred such
                ambiguous and archæan monstrosities as those Lake had just mentioned. At the moment I felt sorry that I had ever read the abhorred _Necronomicon_, or
                talked so much with that unpleasantly erudite folklorist Wilmarth at the
                university.This mood undoubtedly served to aggravate my reaction to the bizarre mirage which
                burst upon us from the increasingly opalescent zenith as we drew near the mountains
                and began to make out the cumulative undulations of the foothills. I had seen dozens of polar mirages during the preceding weeks, some of them quite as
                uncanny and fantastically vivid as the present sample, but this one had a wholly
                novel and obscure quality of menacing symbolism, and I shuddered as the seething
                labyrinth of fabulous walls and towers and minarets loomed out of the troubled ice
                vapors above our heads.The effect was that of a Cyclopean city of no architecture known to man or to human
                imagination, with vast aggregations of night-black masonry embodying monstrous
                perversions of geometrical laws. There were truncated cones, sometimes terraced or fluted, surmounted by tall
                cylindrical shafts here and there bulbously enlarged and often capped with tiers of
                thinnish scalloped disks, and strange, beetling, tablelike constructions suggesting
                piles of multitudinous rectangular slabs or circular plates or five-pointed stars
                with each one overlapping the one beneath.There were composite cones and pyramids either alone or surmounting cylinders or
                cubes or flatter truncated cones and pyramids, and occasional needlelike spires in
                curious clusters of five.All of these febrile structures seemed knit together by tubular bridges crossing from
                one to the other at various dizzy heights, and the implied scale of the whole was
                terrifying and oppressive in its sheer giganticism.The general type of mirage was not unlike some of the wilder forms observed and drawn
                by the arctic whaler Scoresby in 1820, but at this time and place, with those dark,
                unknown mountain peaks soaring stupendously ahead, that anomalous elder-world
                discovery in our minds, and the pall of probable disaster enveloping the greater
                part of our expedition, we all seemed to find in it a taint of latent malignity and
                infinitely evil portent.I was glad when the mirage began to break up, though in the process the various
                nightmare turrets and cones assumed distorted, temporary forms of even vaster
                hideousness. As the whole illusion dissolved to churning opalescence, we began to look earthward
                again, and saw that our journey's end was not far off.The unknown mountains ahead rose dizzily up like a fearsome rampart of giants, their
                curious regularities showing with startling clearness even without a field
                glass. We were over the lowest foothills now, and could see amidst the snow, ice, and bare
                patches of their main plateau a couple of darkish spots which we took to be Lake's
                camp and boring.The higher foothills shot up between five and six miles away, forming a range almost
                distinct from the terrifying line of more than Himalayan peaks beyond them. At length Ropes--the student who had relieved McTighe at the controls--began to head
                downward toward the left-hand dark spot whose size marked it as the camp. As he did so, McTighe sent out the last uncensored wireless message the world was to
                receive from our expedition.Every one, of course, has read the brief and unsatisfying bulletins of the rest of
                our antarctic sojourn.Some hours after our landing we sent a guarded report of the tragedy we found, and
                reluctantly announced the wiping out of the whole Lake party by the frightful wind
                of the preceding day, or of the night before that. There were eleven known dead, young Gedney was missing.People pardoned our hazy lack of details through realization of the shock the sad
                event must have caused us, and believed us when we explained that the mangling
                action of the wind had rendered all eleven bodies unsuitable for transportation
                outside.Indeed, I flatter myself that even in the midst of our distress, utter bewilderment,
                and soul-clutching horror, we scarcely went beyond the truth in any specific
                instance. The tremendous significance lies in what we dared not tell; what I would not tell
                now but for the need of warning others off from nameless terrors.It is a fact that the wind had wrought dreadful havoc. Whether all could have lived through it, even without the other thing, is gravely
                open to doubt. The storm, with its fury of madly driven ice particles, must have been beyond
                anything our expedition had encountered before.One aëroplane shelter--all, it seems, had been left in a far too flimsy and
                inadequate state--was nearly pulverized; and the derrick at the distant boring was
                entirely shaken to pieces.The exposed metal of the grounded planes and drilling machinery was bruised into a
                high polish, and two of the small tents were flattened despite their snow
                banking. Wooden surfaces left out in the blast were pitted and denuded of paint, and all
                signs of tracks in the snow were completely obliterated.It is also true that we found none of the archæan biological objects in a condition
                to take outside as a whole. We did gather some minerals from a vast, tumbled pile, including several of the
                greenish soapstone fragments whose odd five-pointed rounding and faint patterns of
                grouped dots caused so many doubtful comparisons, and some fossil bones, among which
                were the most typical of the curiously injured specimens.None of the dogs survived, their hurriedly built snow inclosure near the camp being
                almost wholly destroyed. The wind may have done that, though the greater breakage, on the side next to the
                camp, which was not the windward one, suggests an outward leap or break of the
                frantic beasts themselves.All three sledges were gone, and we have tried to explain that the wind may have
                blown them off into the unknown. The drill and ice-melting machinery at the boring were too badly damaged to warrant
                salvage, so we used them to choke up that subtly disturbing gateway to the past
                which Lake had blasted.We likewise left at the camp the two most shaken up of the planes; since our
                surviving party had only four real pilots--Sherman, Danforth, McTighe, and Ropes--in
                all, with Danforth in a poor nervous shape to navigate. We brought back all the books, scientific equipment, and other incidentals we could
                find, though much was rather unaccountably blown away. Spare tents and furs were either missing or badly out of condition.It was approximately four p.m., after wide plane cruising had forced us to give Gedney up for lost, that we sent
                our guarded message to the _Arkham_ for relaying; and I think we did well to keep it
                as calm and noncommittal as we succeeded in doing.The most we said about agitation concerned our dogs, whose frantic uneasiness near
                the biological specimens was to be expected from poor Lake's accounts. We did not mention, I think, their display of the same uneasiness when sniffing
                around the queer greenish soapstones and certain other objects in the disordered
                region--objects including scientific instruments, aëroplanes, and machinery, both at
                the camp and at the boring, whose parts had been loosened, moved, or otherwise
                tampered with by winds that must have harbored singular curiosity and
                investigativeness.About the fourteen biological specimens we were pardonably indefinite. We said that the only ones we discovered were damaged, but that enough was left of
                them to prove Lake's description wholly and impressively accurate. It was hard work keeping our personal emotions out of this matter--and we did not
                mention numbers or say exactly how we had found those which we did find. We had by that time agreed not to transmit anything suggesting madness on the part
                of Lake's men, and it surely looked like madness to find six imperfect monstrosities
                carefully buried upright in nine-foot snow graves under five-pointed mounds punched
                over with groups of dots in patterns exactly like those on the queer greenish
                soapstones dug up from Mesozoic or Tertiary times. The eight perfect specimens mentioned by Lake seemed to have been completely blown
                away.We were careful, too, about the public's general peace of mind; hence Danforth and I
                said little about that frightful trip over the mountains the next day. It was the fact that only a radically lightened plane could possibly cross a range
                of such height which mercifully limited that scouting tour to the two of us.On our return at one a.m., Danforth was close to hysterics, but kept an admirably stiff upper lip. It took no persuasion to make him promise not to show our sketches and the other
                things we brought away in our pockets, not to say anything more to the others than
                what we had agreed to relay outside, and to hide our camera films for private
                development later on; so that part of my present story will be as new to Pabodie,
                McTighe, Ropes, Sherman, and the rest as it will be to that world in general. Indeed--Danforth is closer mouthed than I: for he saw, or thinks he saw, one thing
                he will not tell even me.As all know, our report included a tale of a hard ascent--a confirmation of Lake's
                opinion that the great peaks are of archæan slate and other very primal crumpled
                strata unchanged since at least middle Comanchean time, a conventional comment on
                the regularity of the clinging cube and rampart formations, a decision that the cave
                mouths indicate dissolved calcareous veins, a conjecture that certain slopes and
                passes would permit of the scaling and crossing of the entire range by seasoned
                mountaineers, and a remark that the mysterious other side holds a lofty and immense
                superplateau as ancient and unchanging as the mountains themselves--twenty thousand
                feet in elevation, with grotesque rock formations protruding through a thin glacial
                layer and with low gradual foothills between the general plateau surface and the
                sheer precipices of the highest peaks.This body of data is in every respect true so far as it goes, and it completely
                satisfied the men at the camp. We laid our absence of sixteen hours--a longer time than our announced flying,
                landing, reconnoitering, and rock-collecting program called for--to a long mythical
                spell of adverse wind conditions, and told truly of our landing on the farther
                foothills.Fortunately our tale sounded realistic and prosaic enough not to tempt any of the
                others into emulating our flight. Had any tried to do that, I would have used every ounce of my persuasion to stop
                them--and I do not know what Danforth would have done.While we were gone, Pabodie, Sherman, Ropes, McTighe, and Williamson had worked like
                beavers over Lake's two best planes, fitting them again for use, despite the
                altogether unaccountable juggling of their operative mechanism.We decided to load all the planes the next morning and start back for our old base as
                soon as possible. Even though indirect, that was the safest way to work toward McMurdo Sound; for a
                straight-line flight across the most utterly unknown stretches of the æon-dead
                continent would involve many additional hazards.Further exploration was hardly feasible in view of our tragic decimation and the ruin
                of our drilling machinery. The doubts and horrors around us--which we did not reveal--made us wish only to
                escape from this austral world of desolation and brooding madness as swiftly as we
                could.As the public knows, our return to the world was accomplished without further
                disasters. All planes reached the old base on the evening of the next day--January 27th--after
                a swift nonstop flight; and on the 28th we made McMurdo Sound in two laps, the one
                pause being very brief, and occasioned by a faulty rudder, in the furious wind over
                the ice shelf after we had cleared the great plateau.In five days more, the _Arkham_ and _Miskatonic_, with all hands and equipment on
                board, were shaking clear of the thickening field ice and working up Ross Sea, with
                the mocking mountains of Victoria Land looming westward against a troubled antarctic
                sky and twisting the wind's wails into a wide-ranged musical piping which chilled my
                soul to the quick.Less than a fortnight later we left the last hint of polar land behind us and thanked
                heaven that we were clear of a haunted, accursed realm where life and death, space
                and time, have made black and blasphemous alliances in the unknown epochs since
                matter first writhed and swam on the planet's scarce-cooled crust.Since our return we have all constantly worked to discourage antarctic exploration,
                and have kept certain doubts and guesses to ourselves with splendid unity and
                faithfulness. Even young Danforth, with his nervous breakdown, has not flinched or babbled to his
                doctors.Indeed, as I have said, there is one thing he thinks he alone saw which he will not
                tell even me, though I think it would help his psychological state if he would
                consent to do so. It might explain and relieve much, though perhaps the thing was no more than the
                delusive aftermath of an earlier shock. That is the impression I gather after those rare, irresponsible moments when he
                whispers disjointed things to me--things which he repudiates vehemently as soon as
                he gets a grip on himself again.It will be hard work deterring others from the great white south, and some of our
                efforts may directly harm our cause by drawing inquiring notice. We might have known from the first that human curiosity is undying, and that the
                results we announced would be enough to spur others ahead on the same age-long
                pursuit of the unknown.Lake's reports of those biological monstrosities had aroused naturalists and
                palæontologists to the highest pitch, though we were sensible enough not to show the
                detached parts we had taken from the actual buried specimens, or our photographs of
                those specimens as they were found. We also refrained from showing the more puzzling of the scarred bones and greenish
                soapstones; while Danforth and I have closely guarded the pictures we took or drew
                on the superplateau across the range, and the crumpled things we smoothed, studied
                in terror, and brought away in our pockets.But now that Starkweather-Moore party is organizing, and with a thoroughness far
                beyond anything our outfit attempted--if not dissuaded, they will get to the
                innermost nucleus of the antarctic and melt and bore till they bring up that which
                we know may end the world. So I must break through all reticences at last--even about that ultimate, nameless
                thing beyond the mountains of madness. IV.It is only with vast hesitancy and repugnance that I let my mind go back to Lake's
                camp and what we really found there--and to that other thing beyond the awful
                mountain wall.I have told of the wind-ravaged terrain, the damaged shelters, the disarranged
                machinery, the varied uneasiness of our dogs, the missing sledges and other items,
                the deaths of men and dogs, the absence of Gedney, and the six insanely buried
                biological specimens, strangely sound in texture for all their structural injuries,
                from a world forty million years dead. I do not recall whether I mentioned that upon checking up the canine bodies we found
                one dog missing. We did not think much about that till later--indeed, only Danforth and I have
                thought of it at all.The principal things I have been keeping back relate to the bodies, and to certain
                subtle points which may or may not lend a hideous and incredible kind of rationale
                to the apparent chaos.At the time, I tried to keep the men's minds off those points; for it was so much
                simpler--so much more normal--to lay everything to an outbreak of madness on the
                part of some of Lake's party. From the look of things, that demon mountain wind must have been enough to drive any
                man mad in the midst of this center of all earthly mystery and desolation.The crowning abnormality, of course, was the condition of the bodies--men and dogs
                alike. They had all been in some terrible kind of conflict, and were torn and mangled in
                fiendish and altogether inexplicable ways. Death, so far as we could judge, had in each case come from strangulation or
                laceration.The dogs had evidently started the trouble, for the state of their ill-built corral
                bore witness to its forcible breakage from within. It had been set some distance from the camp because of the hatred of the animals for
                those hellish archæan organisms, but the precaution seemed to have been taken in
                vain. When left alone in that monstrous wind, behind flimsy walls of insufficient height,
                they must have stampeded--whether from the wind itself, or from some subtle,
                increasing odor emitted by the nightmare specimens, one could not say.But whatever had happened, it was hideous and revolting enough. Perhaps I had better put squeamishness aside and tell the worst at last--though with
                a categorical statement of opinion, based on the first-hand observations and most
                rigid deductions of both Danforth and myself, that the then missing Gedney was in no
                way responsible for the loathsome horrors we found.I have said that the bodies were frightfully mangled. Now I must add that some were incised and subtracted from in the most curious,
                cold-blooded, and inhuman fashion. It was the same with dogs and men. All the healthier, fatter bodies, quadrupedal or bipedal, had had their most solid
                masses of tissue cut out and removed, as by a careful butcher; and around them was a
                strange sprinkling of salt--taken from the ravaged provision chests on the
                planes--which conjured up the most horrible associations.The thing had occurred in one of the crude aëroplane shelters from which the plane
                had been dragged out, and subsequent winds had effaced all tracks which could have
                supplied any plausible theory. Scattered bits of clothing, roughly slashed from the human incision subjects, hinted
                no clues.It is useless to bring up the half impression of certain faint snow prints in one
                shielded corner of the ruined inclosure--because that impression did not concern
                human prints at all, but was clearly mixed up with all the talk of fossil prints
                which poor Lake had been giving throughout the preceding weeks. One had to be careful of one's imagination in the lee of those overshadowing
                mountains of madness.As I have indicated, Gedney and one dog turned out to be missing in the end. When we came on that terrible shelter we had missed two dogs and two men; but the
                fairly unharmed dissecting tent, which we entered after investigating the monstrous
                graves, had something to reveal.It was not as Lake had left it, for the covered parts of the primal monstrosity had
                been removed from the improvised table. Indeed, we had already realized that one of the six imperfect and insanely buried
                things we had found--the one with the trace of a peculiarly hateful odor--must
                represent the collected sections of the entity which Lake had tried to analyze.On and around that laboratory table were strewn other things, and it did not take
                long for us to guess that those things were the carefully, though oddly and
                inexpertly dissected parts of one man and one dog. I shall spare the feelings of survivors by omitting mention of the man's
                identity.Lake's anatomical instruments were missing, but there were evidences of their careful
                cleansing. The gasoline stove was also gone, though around it we found a curious litter of
                matches. We buried the human parts beside the other ten men, and the canine parts with the
                other thirty-five dogs. Concerning the bizarre smudges on the laboratory table, and on the jumble of roughly
                handled illustrated books scattered near it, we were much too bewildered to
                speculate.This formed the worst of the camp horror, but other things were equally
                perplexing. The disappearance of Gedney, the one dog, the eight uninjured biological specimens,
                the three sledges, and certain instruments, illustrated technical and scientific
                books, writing materials, electric torches and batteries, food and fuel, heating
                apparatus, spare tents, fur suits, and the like, was utterly beyond sane conjecture;
                as were likewise the spatter-fringed ink blots on certain pieces of paper, and the
                evidences of curious alien fumbling and experimentation around the planes and all
                other mechanical devices both at the camp and at the boring. The dogs seemed to abhor this oddly disordered machinery.Then, too, there was the upsetting of the larder, the disappearance of certain
                staples, and the jarringly comical heap of tin cans pried open in the most unlikely
                ways and at the most unlikely places. The profusion of scattered matches, intact, broken, or spent, formed another minor
                enigma--as did the two or three tent cloths and fur suits which we found lying about
                with peculiar and unorthodox slashings conceivably due to clumsy efforts at
                unimaginable adaptations.The maltreatment of the human and canine bodies, and the crazy burial of the damaged
                archæan specimens, were all of a piece with this apparent disintegrative
                madness. In view of just such an eventuality as the present one, we carefully photographed
                all the main evidences of insane disorder at the camp; and shall use the prints to
                buttress our pleas against the departure of the proposed Starkweather-Moore
                Expedition.Our first act after finding the bodies in the shelter was to photograph and open the
                row of insane graves with the five-pointed snow mounds. We could not help noticing the resemblance of these monstrous mounds, with their
                clusters of grouped dots, to poor Lake's descriptions of the strange greenish
                soapstones; and when we came on some of the soapstones themselves in the great
                mineral pile we found the likeness very close indeed.The whole general formation, it must be made clear, seemed abominably suggestive of
                the starfish head of the archæan entities; and we agreed that the suggestion must
                have worked potently upon the sensitized minds of Lake's overwrought party.For madness--centering in Gedney as the only possible surviving agent--was the
                explanation spontaneously adopted by everybody so far as spoken utterance was
                concerned; though I will not be so naïve as to deny that each of us may have
                harbored wild guesses which sanity forbade him to formulate completely.Sherman, Pabodie, and McTighe made an exhaustive aëroplane cruise over all the
                surrounding territory in the afternoon, sweeping the horizon with field glasses in
                quest of Gedney and of the various missing things; but nothing came to light.The party reported that the titan-barrier range extended endlessly to right and left
                alike, without any diminution in height or essential structure. On some of the peaks, though, the regular cube and rampart formations were bolder
                and plainer, having doubly fantastic similitudes to Roerich-painted Asian hill
                ruins. The distribution of cryptical cave mouths on the black snow-denuded summits seemed
                roughly even as far as the range could be traced.In spite of all the prevailing horrors we were left with enough sheer scientific zeal
                and adventurousness to wonder about the unknown realm beyond those mysterious
                mountains.As our guarded messages stated, we rested at midnight after our day of terror and
                bafflement--but not without a tentative plan for one or more range-crossing altitude
                flights in a lightened plane with aërial camera and geologist's outfit, beginning
                the following morning.It was decided that Danforth and I try it first, and we awaked at seven a.m. intending an early trip; though heavy winds--mentioned in our brief bulletin to the
                outside world--delayed our start till nearly nine o'clock.I have already repeated the noncommittal story we told the men at camp--and relayed
                outside--after our return sixteen hours later. It is now my terrible duty to amplify this account by filling in the merciful blanks
                with hints of what we really saw in that hidden transmontane world--hints of the
                revelations which have finally driven Danforth to a nervous collapse.I wish he would add a really frank word about the thing which he thinks he alone
                saw--even though it was probably a nervous delusion--and which was perhaps the last
                straw that put him where he is; but he is firm against that. All I can do is to repeat his later disjointed whispers about what set him shrieking
                as the plane soared back through the wind-tortured mountain pass after that real and
                tangible shock which I shared.This will form my last word. If the plain signs of surviving elder horrors in what I disclose be not enough to
                keep others from meddling with the inner antarctic--or at least from prying too
                deeply beneath the surface of that ultimate waste of forbidden secrets and unhuman,
                æon-cursed desolation--the responsibility for unnamable and perhaps immeasurable
                evils will not be mine.Danforth and I, studying the notes made by Pabodie in his afternoon flight and
                checking up with a sextant, had calculated that the lowest available pass in the
                range lay somewhat to the right of us, within sight of camp, and about twenty-three
                thousand or twenty-four thousand feet above sea-level. For this point, then, we first headed in the lightened plane as we embarked on our
                flight of discovery.The camp itself, on foothills which sprang from a high continental plateau, was some
                twelve thousand feet in altitude; hence the actual height increase necessary was not
                so vast as it might seem. Nevertheless we were acutely conscious of the rarefied air and intense cold as we
                rose; for, on account of visibility conditions, we had to leave the cabin windows
                open. We were dressed, of course, in our heaviest furs.As we drew near the forbidding peaks, dark and sinister above the line of
                crevasse-riven snow and interstitial glaciers, we noticed more and more the
                curiously regular formations clinging to the slopes; and thought again of the
                strange Asian paintings of Nicholas Roerich.The ancient and wind-weathered rock strata fully verified all of Lake's bulletins,
                and proved that these pinnacles had been towering up in exactly the same way since a
                surprisingly early time in earth's history--perhaps over fifty million years. How much higher they had once been, it was futile to guess; but everything about
                this strange region pointed to obscure atmospheric influences unfavorable to change,
                and calculated to retard the usual climatic processes of rock disintegration.But it was the mountainside tangle of regular cubes, ramparts, and cave mouths which
                fascinated and disturbed us most. I studied them with a field glass and took aërial photographs while Danforth drove;
                and at times I relieved him at the controls--though my aviation knowledge was purely
                an amateur's--in order to let him use the binoculars.We could easily see that much of the material of the things was a lightish archæan
                quartzite, unlike any formation visible over broad areas of the general surface; and
                that their regularity was extreme and uncanny to an extent which poor Lake had
                scarcely hinted.As he had said, their edges were crumbled and rounded from untold æons of savage
                weathering; but their preternatural solidity and tough material had saved them from
                obliteration. Many parts, especially those closest to the slopes, seemed identical in substance
                with the surrounding rock surface.The whole arrangement looked like the ruins of Macchu Picchu in the Andes, or the
                primal foundation walls of Kish as dug up by the Oxford-Field Museum Expedition in
                1929; and both Danforth and I obtained that occasional impression of separate
                Cyclopean blocks which Lake had attributed to his flight-companion Carroll.How to account for such things in this place was frankly beyond me, and I felt
                queerly humbled as a geologist. Igneous formations often have strange regularities--like the famous Giants' Causeway
                in Ireland--but this stupendous range, despite Lake's original suspicion of smoking
                cones, was above all else nonvolcanic in evident structure.The curious cave mouths, near which the odd formation seemed most abundant, presented
                another, albeit a lesser puzzle because of their regularity of outline. They were, as Lake's bulletin had said, often approximately square or semicircular;
                as if the natural orifices had been shaped to greater symmetry by some magic
                hand. Their numerousness and wide distribution were remarkable, and suggested that the
                whole region was honeycombed with tunnels dissolved out of limestone strata.Such glimpses as we secured did not extend far within the caverns, but we saw that
                they were apparently clear of stalactites and stalagmites. Outside, those parts of the mountain slopes adjoining the apertures seemed
                invariably smooth and regular; and Danforth thought that the slight cracks and
                pittings of the weathering tended toward unusual patterns.Filled as he was with the horrors and strangenesses discovered at the camp, he hinted
                that the pittings vaguely resembled those baffling groups of dots sprinkled over the
                primeval greenish soapstones, so hideously duplicated on the madly conceived snow
                mounds above those six buried monstrosities.We had risen gradually in flying over the higher foothills and along toward the
                relatively low pass we had selected. As we advanced we occasionally looked down at the snow and ice of the land route,
                wondering whether we could have attempted the trip with the simpler equipment of
                earlier days.Somewhat to our surprise we saw that the terrain was far from difficult as such
                things go; and that despite the crevasses and other bad spots it would not have been
                likely to deter the sledges of a Scott, a Shackleton, or an Amundsen. Some of the glaciers appeared to lead up to wind-bared passes with unusual
                continuity, and upon reaching our chosen pass we found that its case formed no
                exception.Our sensations of tense expectancy as we prepared to round the crest and peer out
                over an untrodden world can hardly be described on paper; even though we had no
                cause to think the regions beyond the range essentially different from those already
                seen and traversed. The touch of evil mystery in these barrier mountains, and in the beckoning sea of
                opalescent sky glimpsed betwixt their summits, was a highly subtle and attenuated
                matter not to be explained in literal words. Rather was it an affair of vague psychological symbolism and æsthetic association--a
                thing mixed up with exotic poetry and paintings, and with archaic myths lurking in
                shunned and forbidden volumes.Even the wind's burden held a peculiar strain of conscious malignity; and for a
                second it seemed that the composite sound included a bizarre musical whistling, or
                piping over a wide range as the blast swept in and out of the omnipresent and
                resonant cave mouths. There was a cloudy note of reminiscent repulsion in this sound, as complex and
                unplaceable as any of the other dark impressions.We were now, after a slow ascent, at a height of twenty-three thousand five hundred
                and seventy feet according to the aneroid; and had left the region of clinging snow
                definitely below us. Up here were only dark, bare rock slopes and the start of rough-ribbed glaciers--but
                with those provocative cubes, ramparts, and echoing cave mouths to add a portent of
                the unnatural, the fantastic, and the dreamlike.Looking along the line of high peaks, I thought I could see the one mentioned by poor
                Lake, with a rampart exactly on top. It seemed to be half lost in a queer antarctic haze--such a haze, perhaps, as had
                been responsible for Lake's early notion of volcanism.The pass loomed directly before us, smooth and windswept between its jagged and
                malignly frowning pylons. Beyond it was a sky fretted with swirling vapors and lighted by the low polar
                sun--the sky of that mysterious farther realm upon which we felt no human eye had
                ever gazed.A few more feet of altitude and we would behold that realm. Danforth and I, unable to speak except in shouts amidst the howling, piping wind
                that raced through the pass and added to the noise of the unmuffled engines,
                exchanged eloquent glances. And then, having gained those last few feet, we did indeed stare across the
                momentous divide and over the unsampled secrets of an elder and utterly alien
                earth. V.I think that both of us simultaneously cried out in mixed awe, wonder, terror, and
                disbelief in our own senses as we finally cleared the pass and saw what lay
                beyond. Of course, we must have had some natural theory in the back of our heads to steady
                our faculties for the moment. Probably we thought of such things as the grotesquely weathered stones of the Garden
                of the Gods in Colorado, or the fantastically symmetrical wind-carved rocks of the
                Arizona desert. Perhaps we even half thought the sight a mirage like that we had seen the morning
                before on first approaching those mountains of madness.We must have had some such normal notions to fall back upon as our eyes swept that
                limitless, tempest-scarred plateau and grasped the almost endless labyrinth of
                colossal, regular, and geometrically eurythmic stone masses which reared their
                crumbled and pitted crests above a glacial sheet not more than forty or fifty feet
                deep at its thickest, and in places obviously thinner.The effect of the monstrous sight was indescribable, for some fiendish violation of
                known natural law seemed certain at the outset. Here, on a hellishly ancient table-land fully twenty thousand feet high, and in a
                climate deadly to habitation since a prehuman age not less than five hundred
                thousand years ago, there stretched nearly to the vision's limit a tangle of orderly
                stone which only the desperation of mental self-defense could possibly attribute to
                any but a conscious and artificial cause.[Illustration: _The effect of the monstrous sight was indescribable! Some
                fiendish violation of natural law!We had previously dismissed, so far as serious thought was concerned, any theory that
                the cubes and ramparts of the mountainsides were other than natural in origin. How could they be otherwise, when man himself could scarcely have been
                differentiated from the great apes at the time when this region succumbed to the
                present unbroken reign of glacial death?Yet now the sway of reason seemed irrefutably shaken, for this Cyclopean maze of
                squared, curved, and angled blocks had features which cut off all comfortable
                refuge. It was, very clearly, the blasphemous city of the mirage in stark, objective, and
                ineluctable reality. That damnable portent had had a material basis after all--there had been some
                horizontal stratum of ice dust in the upper air, and this shocking stone survival
                had projected its image across the mountains according to the simple laws of
                reflection. Of course, the phantom had been twisted and exaggerated, and had contained things
                which the real source did not contain; yet now, as we saw that real source, we
                thought it even more hideous and menacing than its distant image.[Illustration: _It was, very clearly, the blasphemous city of the mirage--in stark,
                objective reality!Only the incredible, unhuman massiveness of these vast stone towers and ramparts
                had saved the frightful thing from utter annihilation in the hundreds of
                thousands--perhaps millions--of years it had brooded there amidst the blasts of a
                bleak upland.I thought again of the eldritch primal myths that had so persistently haunted me
                since my first sight of this dead antarctic world--of the demonic plateau of Leng,
                of the Mi-Go, or Abominable Snow Men of the Himalayas, of the Pnakotic Manuscripts
                with their prehuman implications, of the Cthulhu cult, of the _Necronomicon_, and of
                the Hyperborean legends of formless Tsathoggua and the worse than formless star
                spawn associated with that semientity.For boundless miles in every direction the thing stretched off with very little
                thinning; indeed, as our eyes followed it to the right and left along the base of
                the low, gradual foothills which separated it from the actual mountain rim, we
                decided that we could see no thinning at all except for an interruption at the left
                of the pass through which we had come. We had merely struck, at random, a limited part of something of incalculable
                extent.The foothills were more sparsely sprinkled with grotesque stone structures, linking
                the terrible city to the already familiar cubes and ramparts which evidently formed
                its mountain outposts. These latter, as well as the queer cave mouths, were as thick on the inner as on the
                outer sides of the mountains.The nameless stone labyrinth consisted, for the most part, of walls from ten to one
                hundred and fifty feet in ice-clear height, and of a thickness varying from five to
                ten feet. It was composed mostly of prodigious blocks of dark primordial slate, schist, and
                sandstone--blocks in many cases as large as 4 × 6 × 8 feet--though in several places
                it seemed to be carved out of a solid, uneven bed rock of pre-Cambrian slate.The buildings were far from equal in size, there being innumerable honeycomb
                arrangements of enormous extent as well as smaller separate structures.The general shape of these things tended to be conical, pyramidal, or terraced;
                though there were many perfect cylinders, perfect cubes, clusters of cubes, and
                other rectangular forms, and a peculiar sprinkling of angled edifices whose
                five-pointed ground plan roughly suggested modern fortifications. The builders had made constant and expert use of the principle of the arch, and
                domes had probably existed in the city's heyday.The whole tangle was monstrously weathered, and the glacial surface from where the
                towers projected was strewn with fallen blocks and immemorial débris. Where the glaciation was transparent we could see the lower parts of the gigantic
                piles, and we noticed the ice-preserved stone bridges which connected the different
                towers at varying distances above the ground. On the exposed walls we could detect the scarred places where other and higher
                bridges of the same sort had existed.Closer inspection revealed countless largish windows; some of which were closed with
                shutters of a petrified material originally wood, though most gaped open in a
                sinister and menacing fashion.Many of the ruins, of course, were roofless, and with uneven though wind-rounded
                upper edges; whilst others, of a more sharply conical or pyramidal model or else
                protected by higher surrounding structures, preserved intact outlines despite the
                omnipresent crumbling and pitting. With the field glass we could barely make out what seemed to be sculptural
                decorations in horizontal bands--decorations including those curious groups of dots
                whose presence on the ancient soapstones now assumed a vastly larger
                significance.In many places the buildings were totally ruined and the ice sheet deeply riven from
                various geologic causes. In other places the stonework was worn down to the very level of the glaciation. One broad swath, extending from the plateau's interior to a cleft in the foothills
                about a mile to the left of the pass we had traversed, was wholly free from
                buildings. It probably represented, we concluded, the course of some great river which in
                Tertiary times--millions of years ago--had poured through the city and into some
                prodigious subterranean abyss of the great barrier range. Certainly, this was above all a region of caves, gulfs, and underground secrets
                beyond human penetration.Looking back to our sensations, and recalling our dazedness at viewing this monstrous
                survival from æons we had thought prehuman, I can only wonder that we preserved the
                semblance of equilibrium which we did. Of course, we knew that something--chronology, scientific theory, or our own
                consciousness--was woefully awry; yet we kept enough poise to guide the plane,
                observe many things quite minutely, and take a careful series of photographs which
                may yet serve both us and the world in good stead.In my case, ingrained scientific habit may have helped; for above all my bewilderment
                and sense of menace there burned a dominant curiosity to fathom more of this age-old
                secret--to know what sort of beings had built and lived in this incalculably
                gigantic place, and what relation to the general world of its time or of other times
                so unique a concentration of life could have had.For this place could be no ordinary city. It must have formed the primary nucleus and center of some archaic and unbelievable
                chapter of earth's history whose outward ramifications, recalled only dimly in the
                most obscure and distorted myths, had vanished utterly amidst the chaos of terrene
                convulsions long before any human race we know had shambled out of apedom.Here sprawled a Palæogæan megalopolis compared with which the fabled Atlantis and
                Lemuria, Commoriom and Uzuldaroum, and Olathoë in the land of Lomar are recent
                things of to-day--not even of yesterday; a megalopolis ranking with such whispered
                prehuman blasphemies as Valusia, R'lyeh, Ib in the land of Mnar, and the Nameless
                City of Arabia Deserta.As we flew above that tangle of stark Titan towers my imagination sometimes escaped
                all bounds and roved aimlessly in realms of fantastic associations--even weaving
                links betwixt this lost world and some of my own wildest dreams concerning the mad
                horror at the camp.The plane's fuel tank, in the interest of greater lightness, had been only partly
                filled; hence we now had to exert caution in our explorations. Even so, however, we covered an enormous extent of ground--or rather, air--after
                swooping down to a level where the wind became virtually negligible.There seemed to be no limit to the mountain range, or to the length of the frightful
                stone city which bordered its inner foothills. Fifty miles of flight in each direction showed no major change in the labyrinth of
                rock and masonry that clawed up corpselike through the eternal ice.There were, though, some highly absorbing diversifications; such as the carvings on
                the canyon where that broad river had once pierced the foothills and approached its
                sinking place in the great range.The headlands at the stream's entrance had been boldly carved into Cyclopean pylons;
                and something about the ridgy, barrel-shaped designs stirred up oddly vague,
                hateful, and confusing semiremembrances in both Danforth and me.We also came upon several star-shaped open spaces, evidently public squares, and
                noted various undulations in the terrain. Where a sharp hill rose, it was generally hollowed out into some sort of rambling
                stone edifice; but there were at least two exceptions. Of these latter, one was too badly weathered to disclose what had been on the
                jutting eminence, while the other still bore a fantastic conical monument carved out
                of the solid rock and roughly resembling such things as the well-known Snake Tomb in
                the ancient valley of Petra.Flying inland from the mountains, we discovered that the city was not of infinite
                width, even though its length along the foothills seemed endless. After about thirty miles the grotesque stone buildings began to thin out, and in ten
                more miles we came to an unbroken waste virtually without signs of sentient
                artifice. The course of the river beyond the city seemed marked by a broad, depressed line,
                while the land assumed a somewhat greater ruggedness, seeming to slope slightly
                upward as it receded in the mist-hazed west.So far we had made no landing, yet to leave the plateau without an attempt at
                entering some of the monstrous structures would have been inconceivable. Accordingly, we decided to find a smooth place on the foothills near our navigable
                pass, there grounding the plane and preparing to do some exploration on foot.Though these gradual slopes were partly covered with a scattering of ruins, low
                flying soon disclosed an ample number of possible landing places. Selecting that nearest to the pass, since our next flight would be across the great
                range and back to camp, we succeeded about twelve thirty p.m. in coming down on a smooth, hard snow field wholly devoid of obstacles and well
                adapted to a swift and favorable take-off later on.It did not seem necessary to protect the plane with a snow banking for so brief a
                time and in so comfortable an absence of high winds at this level; hence we merely
                saw that the landing skis were safely lodged, and that the vital parts of the
                mechanism were guarded against the cold.For our foot journey we discarded the heaviest of our flying furs, and took with us a
                small outfit consisting of pocket compass, hand camera, light provisions, voluminous
                notebooks and paper, geologist's hammer and chisel, specimen bags, coil of climbing
                rope, and powerful electric torches with extra batteries; this equipment having been
                carried in the plane on the chance that we might be able to effect a landing, take
                ground pictures, make drawings and topographical sketches, and obtain rock specimens
                from some bare slope, outcropping, or mountain cave.Fortunately, we had a supply of extra paper to tear up, place in a spare specimen
                bag, and use on the ancient principle of hare and hounds for marking our course in
                any interior mazes we might be able to penetrate. This had been brought in case we found some cave system with air quiet enough to
                allow such a rapid and easy method in place of the usual rock-chipping method of
                trail blazing.Walking cautiously downhill over the crusted snow, toward the stupendous stone
                labyrinth that loomed against the opalescent west, we felt almost as keen a sense of
                imminent marvels as we had felt on approaching the unfathomed mountain pass four
                hours previously.True, we had become visually familiar with the incredible secret concealed by the
                barrier peaks; yet the prospect of actually entering primordial walls reared by
                conscious beings perhaps millions of years ago--before any known race of men could
                have existed--was none the less awesome and potentially terrible in its implications
                of cosmic abnormality.Though the thinness of the air at this prodigious altitude made exertion somewhat
                more difficult than usual, both Danforth and I found ourselves bearing up very well,
                and felt equal to almost any task which might fall to our lot.It took only a few steps to bring us to a shapeless ruin worn level with the snow,
                while ten or fifteen rods farther on there was a huge, roofless rampart still
                complete in its gigantic five-pointed outline, and rising to an irregular height of
                ten or eleven feet. For this latter we headed; and when at last we were actually able to touch its
                weathered Cyclopean blocks, we felt that we had established an unprecedented and
                almost blasphemous link with forgotten æons normally closed to our species.This rampart, shaped like a star and perhaps three hundred feet from point to point,
                was built of Jurassic sandstone blocks of irregular size, averaging 6 x 8 feet in
                surface. There was a row of arched loopholes or windows about four feet wide and five feet
                high, spaced quite symmetrically along the points of the star and at its inner
                angles, and with the bottoms about four feet from the glaciated surface.Looking through these, we could see that the masonry was fully five feet thick, that
                there were no partitions remaining within, and that there were traces of banded
                carvings or bas-reliefs on the interior walls--facts we had indeed guessed before,
                when flying low over this rampart and others like it. Though lower parts must have originally existed, all traces of such things were now
                wholly obscured by the deep layer of ice and snow at this point.We crawled through one of the windows and vainly tried to decipher the nearly effaced
                mural designs, but did not attempt to disturb the glaciated floor. Our orientation flights had indicated that many buildings in the city proper were
                less ice-choked, and that we might perhaps find wholly clear interiors leading down
                to the true ground level if we entered those structures still roofed at the top.Before we left the rampart we photographed it carefully, and studied its mortarless
                Cyclopean masonry with complete bewilderment. We wished that Pabodie were present, for his engineering knowledge might have helped
                us guess how such titanic blocks could have been handled in that unbelievably remote
                age when the city and its outskirts were built up.The half-mile walk downhill to the actual city, with the upper wind shrieking vainly
                and savagely through the skyward peaks in the background, was something of which the
                smallest details will always remain engraved on my mind. Only in fantastic nightmares could any human beings but Danforth and me conceive
                such optical effects.Between us and the churning vapors of the west lay that monstrous tangle of dark
                stone towers, its outré and incredible forms impressing us afresh at every new angle
                of vision. It was a mirage in solid stone, and were it not for the photographs I would still
                doubt that such a thing could be. The general type of masonry was identical with that of the rampart we had examined;
                but the extravagant shapes which this masonry took in its urban manifestations were
                past all description.Even the pictures illustrate only one or two phases of its endless variety,
                preternatural massiveness, and utterly alien exoticism. There were geometrical forms for which an Euclid could scarcely find a name--cones
                of all degrees of irregularity and truncation, terraces of every sort of provocative
                disproportion, shafts with odd bulbous enlargements, broken columns in curious
                groups, and five-pointed or five-ridged arrangements of mad grotesqueness.As we drew nearer we could see beneath certain transparent parts of the ice sheet,
                and detect some of the tubular stone bridges that connected the crazily sprinkled
                structures at various heights. Of orderly streets there seemed to be none, the only broad open swath being a mile
                to the left, where the ancient river had doubtless flowed through the town into the
                mountains.Our field glasses showed the external, horizontal bands of nearly effaced sculptures
                and dot groups to be very prevalent, and we could half imagine what the city must
                once have looked like--even though most of the roofs and tower tops had necessarily
                perished.As a whole, it had been a complex tangle of twisted lanes and alleys, all of them
                deep canyons, and some little better than tunnels because of the overhanging masonry
                or overarching bridges.Now, outspread below us, it loomed like a dream phantasy against a westward mist
                through whose northern end the low, reddish antarctic sun of early afternoon was
                struggling to shine; and when, for a moment, that sun encountered a denser
                obstruction and plunged the scene into temporary shadow, the effect was subtly
                menacing in a way I can never hope to depict. Even the faint howling and piping of the unfelt wind in the great mountain passes
                behind us took on a wilder note of purposeful malignity.The last stage of our descent to the town was unusually steep and abrupt, and a rock
                outcropping at the edge where the grade changed led us to think that an artificial
                terrace had once existed there. Under the glaciation, we believed, there must be a flight of steps or its
                equivalent.When at last we plunged into the town itself, clambering over fallen masonry and
                shrinking from the oppressive nearness and dwarfing height of omnipresent crumbling
                and pitted walls, our sensations again became such that I marvel at the amount of
                self-control we retained.Danforth was frankly jumpy, and began making some offensively irrelevant speculations
                about the horror at the camp--which I resented all the more because I could not help
                sharing certain conclusions forced upon us by many features of this morbid survival
                from nightmare antiquity.The speculations worked on his imagination, too; for in one place--where a
                débris-littered alley turned a sharp corner--he insisted that he saw faint traces of
                ground markings which he did not like; whilst elsewhere he stopped to listen to a
                subtle, imaginary sound from some undefined point--a muffled musical piping, he
                said, not unlike that of the wind in the mountain caves, yet somehow disturbingly
                different.The ceaseless five-pointedness of the surrounding architecture and of the few
                distinguishable mural arabesques had a dimly sinister suggestiveness we could not
                escape, and gave us a touch of terrible subconscious certainty concerning the primal
                entities which had reared and dwelt in this unhallowed place.Nevertheless, our scientific and adventurous souls were not wholly dead, and we
                mechanically carried out our program of chipping specimens from all the different
                rock types represented in the masonry. We wished a rather full set in order to draw better conclusions regarding the age of
                the place.Nothing in the great outer walls seemed to date from later than the Jurassic and
                Comanchean periods, nor was any piece of stone in the entire place of a greater
                recency than the Pliocene age. In stark certainty, we were wandering amidst a death which had reigned at least five
                hundred thousand years, and in all probability even longer.As we proceeded through this maze of stone-shadowed twilight we stopped at all
                available apertures to study interiors and investigate entrance possibilities. Some were above our reach, whilst others led only into ice-choked ruins as unroofed
                and barren as the rampart on the hill.One, though spacious and inviting, opened on a seemingly bottomless abyss without
                visible means of descent. Now and then we had a chance to study the petrified wood of a surviving shutter, and
                were impressed by the fabulous antiquity implied in the still discernible grain. These things had come from Mesozoic gymnosperms and conifers--especially Cretaceous
                cycads--and from fan palms and early angiosperms of plainly Tertiary date. Nothing definitely later than the Pliocene could be discovered.In the placing of these shutters--whose edges showed the former presence of queer and
                long-vanished hinges--usage seemed to be varied--some being on the outer and some on
                the inner side of the deep embrasures. They seemed to have become wedged in place, thus surviving the rusting of their
                former and probably metallic fixtures and fastenings.After a time we came across a row of windows--in the bulges of a colossal five-edged
                cone of undamaged apex--which led into a vast, well-preserved room with stone
                flooring; but these were too high in the room to permit descent without a rope. We had a rope with us, but did not wish to bother with this twenty-foot drop unless
                obliged to--especially in this thin plateau air where great demands were made upon
                the heart action.This enormous room was probably a hall or concourse of some sort, and our electric
                torches showed bold, distinct, and potentially startling sculptures arranged round
                the walls in broad, horizontal bands separated by equally broad strips of
                conventional arabesques. We took careful note of this spot, planning to enter here unless a more easily
                gained interior was encountered.Finally, though, we did encounter exactly the opening we wished; an archway about six
                feet wide and ten feet high, marking the former end of an aërial bridge which had
                spanned an alley about five feet above the present level of glaciation. These archways, of course, were flush with upper-story floors, and in this case one
                of the floors still existed.The building thus accessible was a series of rectangular terraces on our left facing
                westward. That across the alley, where the other archway yawned, was a decrepit cylinder with
                no windows and with a curious bulge about ten feet above the aperture. It was totally dark inside, and the archway seemed to open on a well of illimitable
                emptiness.Heaped débris made the entrance to the vast left-hand building doubly easy, yet for a
                moment we hesitated before taking advantage of the long-wished chance. For though we had penetrated into this tangle of archaic mystery, it required fresh
                resolution to carry us actually inside a complete and surviving building of a
                fabulous elder world whose nature was becoming more and more hideously plain to
                us.In the end, however, we made the plunge, and scrambled up over the rubble into the
                gaping embrasure. The floor beyond was of great slate slabs, and seemed to form the outlet of a long,
                high corridor with sculptured walls.Observing the many inner archways which led off from it, and realizing the probable
                complexity of the nest of apartments within, we decided that we must begin our
                system of hare-and-hound trail blazing. Hitherto our compasses, together with frequent glimpses of the vast mountain range
                between the towers in our rear, had been enough to prevent our losing our way; but
                from now on, the artificial substitute would be necessary.Accordingly we reduced our extra paper to shreds of suitable size, placed these in a
                bag to be carried by Danforth, and prepared to use them as economically as safety
                would allow. This method would probably gain us immunity from straying, since there did not
                appear to be any strong air currents inside the primordial masonry. If such should develop, or if our paper supply should give out, we could of course
                fall back on the more secure though more tedious and retarding method of rock
                chipping.Just how extensive a territory we had opened up, it was impossible to guess without a
                trial. The close and frequent connection of the different buildings made it likely that we
                might cross from one to another on bridges underneath the ice, except where impeded
                by local collapses and geologic rifts, for very little glaciation seemed to have
                entered the massive constructions.Almost all the areas of transparent ice had revealed the submerged windows as tightly
                shuttered, as if the town had been left in that uniform state until the glacial
                sheet came to crystallize the lower part for all succeeding time. Indeed, one gained a curious impression that this place had been deliberately closed
                and deserted in some dim, bygone æon, rather than overwhelmed by any sudden calamity
                or even gradual decay. Had the coming of the ice been foreseen, and had a nameless population left _en
                masse_ to seek a less doomed abode?The precise physiographic conditions attending the formation of the ice sheet at this
                point would have to wait for later solution. It had not, very plainly, been a grinding drive. Perhaps the pressure of accumulated snows had been responsible, and perhaps some
                flood from the river, or from the bursting of some ancient glacial dam in the great
                range, had helped to create the special state now observable. Imagination could conceive almost anything in connection with this place. VI.It would be cumbrous to give a detailed, consecutive account of our wanderings inside
                that cavernous, æon-dead honeycomb of primal masonry--that monstrous lair of elder
                secrets which now echoed for the first time, after uncounted epochs, to the tread of
                human feet.This is especially true because so much of the horrible drama and revelation came
                from a mere study of the omnipresent mural carvings. Our flash-light photographs of those carvings will do much toward proving the truth
                of what we are now disclosing, and it is lamentable that we had not a larger film
                supply with us. As it was, we made crude notebook sketches of certain salient features after all our
                films were used up.The building which we had entered was one of great size and elaborateness, and gave
                us an impressive notion of the architecture of that nameless geologic past. The inner partitions were less massive than the outer walls, but on the lower levels
                were excellently preserved. Labyrinthine complexity, involving curiously irregular differences in floor levels,
                characterized the entire arrangement; and we should certainly have been lost at the
                very outset but for the trail of torn paper left behind us.We decided to explore the more decrepit upper parts first of all, hence climbed aloft
                in the maze for a distance of some one hundred feet, to where the topmost tier of
                chambers yawned snowily and ruinously open to the polar sky. Ascent was effected over the steep, transversely ribbed stone ramps or inclined
                planes which everywhere served in lieu of stairs.The rooms we encountered were of all imaginable shapes and proportions, ranging from
                five-pointed stars to triangles and perfect cubes. It might be safe to say that their general average was about 30 x 30 feet in floor
                area, and twenty feet in height, though many larger apartments existed.After thoroughly examining the upper regions and the glacial level we descended,
                story by story, into the submerged part, where indeed we soon saw we were in a
                continuous maze of connected chambers and passages probably leading over unlimited
                areas outside this particular building.The Cyclopean massiveness and giganticism of everything about us became curiously
                oppressive; and there was something vaguely but deeply unhuman in all the contours,
                dimensions, proportions, decorations, and constructional nuances of the
                blasphemously archaic stonework. We soon realized, from what the carvings revealed, that this monstrous city was many
                million years old.We cannot yet explain the engineering principles used in the anomalous balancing and
                adjustment of the vast rock masses, though the function of the arch was clearly much
                relied on. The rooms we visited were wholly bare of all portable contents, a circumstance which
                sustained our belief in the city's deliberate desertion. The prime decorative feature was the almost universal system of mural sculpture,
                which tended to run in continuous horizontal bands three feet wide and arranged from
                floor to ceiling in alternation with bands of equal width given over to geometrical
                arabesques.There were exceptions to this rule of arrangement, but its preponderance was
                overwhelming. Often, however, a series of smooth cartouches containing oddly patterned groups of
                dots would be sunk along one of the arabesque bands.The technique, we soon saw, was mature, accomplished, and æsthetically evolved to the
                highest degree of civilized mastery, though utterly alien in every detail to any
                known art tradition of the human race. In delicacy of execution no sculpture I have ever seen could approach it. The minutest details of elaborate vegetation, or of animal life, were rendered with
                astonishing vividness despite the bold scale of the carvings; whilst the
                conventional designs were marvels of skillful intricacy.The arabesques displayed a profound use of mathematical principles, and were made up
                of obscurely symmetrical curves and angles based on the quantity of five.The pictorial bands followed a highly formalized tradition, and involved a peculiar
                treatment of perspective, but had an artistic force that moved us profoundly
                notwithstanding the intervening gulf of vast geologic periods.Their method of design hinged on a singular juxtaposition of the cross section with
                the two-dimensional silhouette, and embodied an analytical psychology beyond that of
                any known race of antiquity. It is useless to try to compare this art with any represented in our museums. Those who see our photographs will probably find its closest analogue in certain
                grotesque conceptions of the most daring futurists.The arabesque tracery consisted altogether of depressed lines, whose depth on
                unweathered walls varied from one to two inches. When cartouches with dot groups appeared--evidently as inscriptions in some unknown
                and primordial language and alphabet--the depression of the smooth surface was
                perhaps an inch and a half, and of the dots perhaps a half inch more. The pictorial bands were in countersunk low relief, their background being depressed
                about two inches from the original wall surface.In some specimens marks of a former coloration could be detected, though for the most
                part the untold æons had disintegrated and banished any pigments which may have been
                applied. The more one studied the marvelous technique the more one admired the things. Beneath their strict conventionalization one could grasp the minute and accurate
                observation and graphic skill of the artists; and indeed, the very conventions
                themselves served to symbolize and accentuate the real essence or vital
                differentiation of every object delineated.We felt, too, that besides these recognizable excellences there were others lurking
                beyond the reach of our perceptions. Certain touches here and there gave vague hints of latent symbols and stimuli which
                another mental and emotional background, and a fuller or different sensory
                equipment, might have made of profound and poignant significance to us.The subject matter of the sculptures obviously came from the life of the vanished
                epoch of their creation, and contained a large proportion of evident history. It is this abnormal historic-mindedness of the primal race--a chance circumstance
                operating, through coincidence, miraculously in our favor--which made the carvings
                so awesomely informative to us, and which caused us to place their photography and
                transcription above all other considerations.In certain rooms the dominant arrangement was varied by the presence of maps,
                astronomical charts, and other scientific designs on an enlarged scale--these things
                giving a naïve and terrible corroboration to what we gathered from the pictorial
                friezes and dados.In hinting at what the whole revealed, I can only hope that my account will not
                arouse a curiosity greater than sane caution on the part of those who believe me at
                all. It would be tragic if any were to be allured to that realm of death and horror by
                the very warning meant to discourage them.Interrupting these sculptured walls were high windows and massive twelve-foot
                doorways; both now and then retaining the petrified wooden planks--elaborately
                carved and polished--of the actual shutters and doors. All metal fixtures had long ago vanished, but some of the doors remained in place
                and had to be forced aside as we progressed from room to room.Window frames with odd transparent panes--mostly elliptical--survived here and there,
                though in no considerable quantity. There were also frequent niches of great magnitude, generally empty, but once in a
                while containing some bizarre object carved from green soapstone which was either
                broken or perhaps held too inferior to warrant removal.Other apertures were undoubtedly connected with bygone mechanical
                facilities--heating, lighting, and the like--of a sort suggested in many of the
                carvings. Ceilings tended to be plain, but had sometimes been inlaid with green soapstone or
                other tiles, mostly fallen now. Floors were also paved with such tiles, though plain stonework predominated.As I have said, all furniture and other movables were absent; but the sculptures gave
                a clear idea of the strange devices which had once filled these tomblike, echoing
                rooms. Above the glacial sheet the floors were generally thick with detritus, litter, and
                débris, but farther down this condition decreased.In some of the lower chambers and corridors there was little more than gritty dust or
                ancient incrustations, while occasional areas had an uncanny air of newly swept
                immaculateness. Of course, where rifts or collapses had occurred, the lower levels were as littered
                as the upper ones.A central court--as we had seen in other structures, from the air--saved the inner
                regions from total darkness; so that we seldom had to use our electric torches in
                the upper rooms except when studying sculptured details. Below the ice cap, however, the twilight deepened; and in many parts of the tangled
                ground level there was an approach to absolute blackness.To form even a rudimentary idea of our thoughts and feelings as we penetrated this
                æon-silent maze of unhuman masonry one must correlate a hopelessly bewildering chaos
                of fugitive moods, memories, and impressions. The sheer appalling antiquity and lethal desolation of the place were enough to
                overwhelm almost any sensitive person, but added to these elements were the recent
                unexplained horror at the camp, and the revelations all too soon effected by the
                terrible mural sculptures around us.The moment we came upon a perfect section of carving, where no ambiguity of
                interpretation could exist, it took only a brief study to give us the hideous
                truth--a truth which it would be naïve to claim Danforth and I had not independently
                suspected before, though we had carefully refrained from even hinting it to each
                other. There could now be no further merciful doubt about the nature of the beings which
                had built and inhabited this monstrous dead city millions of years ago, when man's
                ancestors were primitive archaic mammals, and vast Dinosauria roamed the tropical
                steppes of Europe and Asia.We had previously clung to a desperate alternative and insisted--each to
                himself--that the omnipresence of the five-pointed motif meant only some cultural or
                religious exaltation of the archæan natural object which had so patently embodied
                the quality of five-pointedness; as the decorative motifs of Minoan Crete exalted
                the sacred bull, those of Egypt the scarabæus, those of Rome the wolf and the eagle,
                and those of various savage tribes some chosen totem animal.But this lone refuge was now stripped from us, and we were forced to face definitely
                the reason-shaking realization which the reader of these pages has doubtless long
                ago anticipated. I can scarcely bear to write it down in black and white even now, but perhaps that
                will not be necessary.The things once rearing and dwelling in this frightful masonry in the age of
                Dinosauria were not indeed Dinosauria, but far worse. Mere Dinosauria were new and almost brainless objects--but the builders of the city
                were wise and old, and had left certain traces in rocks even then laid down well
                nigh a thousand million years--rocks laid down before the true life of earth had
                advanced beyond plastic groups of cells--rocks laid down before the true life of
                earth had existed at all.They were the makers and enslavers of that life, and above all doubt the originals
                of the fiendish elder myths which things like the Pnakotic Manuscripts and the
                _Necronomicon_ affrightedly hint about.It is, of course, impossible for me to relate in proper order the stages by which we
                picked up what we know of that monstrous chapter of prehuman life. After the first shock of the certain revelation, we had to pause a while to
                recuperate, and it was fully three o'clock before we got started on our actual tour
                of systematic research.The sculptures in the building we entered were of relatively late date--perhaps two
                million years ago--as checked up by geological, biological, and astronomical
                features--and embodied an art which would be called decadent in comparison with that
                of specimens we found in older buildings, after crossing bridges under the glacial
                sheet.One edifice hewn from the solid rock seemed to go back forty or possibly even fifty
                million years--to the lower Eocene or upper Cretaceous--and contained bas-reliefs of
                an artistry surpassing anything else, with one tremendous exception, that we
                encountered. That was, we have since agreed, the oldest domestic structure we traversed.Were it not for the support of those flashlights soon to be made public, I would
                refrain from telling what I found and inferred, lest I be confined as a madman. Of course, the infinitely early parts of the patchwork tale--representing the
                preterrestrial life of the star-headed beings on other planets, in other galaxies,
                and in other universes--can readily be interpreted as the fantastic mythology of
                those beings themselves; yet such parts sometimes involved designs and diagrams so
                uncannily close to the latest findings of mathematics and astrophysics that I
                scarcely know what to think. Let others judge when they see the photographs I shall publish.Naturally, no one set of carvings which we encountered told more than a fraction of
                any connected story, nor did we even begin to come upon the various stages of that
                story in their proper order. Some of the vast rooms were independent units so far as their designs were
                concerned, whilst in other cases a continuous chronicle would be carried through a
                series of rooms and corridors.The best of the maps and diagrams were on the walls of a frightful abyss below even
                the ancient ground level--a cavern perhaps two hundred feet square and sixty feet
                high, which had almost undoubtedly been an educational center of some sort.There were many provoking repetitions of the same material in different rooms and
                buildings, since certain chapters of experience, and certain summaries or phases of
                racial history, had evidently been favorites with different decorators or
                dwellers. Sometimes, though, variant versions of the same theme proved useful in settling
                debatable points and filling up gaps.I still wonder that we deduced so much in the short time at our disposal. Of course, we even now have only the barest outline--and much of that was obtained
                later on from a study of the photographs and sketches we made.It may be the effect of this later study--the revived memories and vague impressions
                acting in conjunction with his general sensitiveness and with that final supposed
                horror-glimpse whose essence he will not reveal even to me--which has been the
                immediate source of Danforth's present breakdown.But it had to be; for we could not issue our warning intelligently without the
                fullest possible information, and the issuance of that warning is a prime
                necessity. Certain lingering influences in that unknown antarctic world of disordered time and
                alien natural law make it imperative that further exploration be discouraged. VII.The full story, so far as deciphered, will eventually appear in an official bulletin
                of Miskatonic University. Here I shall sketch only the salient highlights in a formless, rambling way. Myth or otherwise, the sculptures told of the coming of those star-headed things to
                the nascent, lifeless earth out of cosmic space--their coming, and the coming of
                many other alien entities such as at certain times embark upon spatial
                pioneering.They seemed able to traverse the interstellar ether on their vast membranous
                wings--thus oddly confirming some curious hill folklore long ago told me by an
                antiquarian colleague. They had lived under the sea a good deal, building fantastic cities and fighting
                terrific battles with nameless adversaries by means of intricate devices employing
                unknown principles of energy.Evidently their scientific and mechanical knowledge far surpassed man's to-day,
                though they made use of its more widespread and elaborate forms only when obliged
                to.Some of the sculptures suggested that they had passed through a stage of mechanized
                life on other planets, but had receded upon finding its effects emotionally
                unsatisfying. Their preternatural toughness of organization and simplicity of natural wants made
                them peculiarly able to live on a high plane without the more specialized fruits of
                artificial manufacture, and even without garments, except for occasional protection
                against the elements.It was under the sea, at first for food and later for other purposes, that they first
                created earth life--using available substances according to long-known methods.The more elaborate experiments came after the annihilation of various cosmic
                enemies. They had done the same thing on other planets, having manufactured not only
                necessary foods, but certain multicellular protoplasmic masses capable of molding
                their tissues into all sorts of temporary organs under hypnotic influence and
                thereby forming ideal slaves to perform the heavy work of the community.When the star-headed Old Ones on this planet had synthesized their simple food forms
                and bred a good supply of Shoggoths, they allowed other cell groups to develop into
                other forms of animal and vegetable life for sundry purposes, extirpating any whose
                presence became troublesome.With the aid of the Shoggoths, whose expansions could be made to lift prodigious
                weights, the small, low cities under the sea grew to vast and imposing labyrinths of
                stone not unlike those which later rose on land. Indeed, the highly adaptable Old Ones had lived much on land in other parts of the
                universe, and probably retained many traditions of land construction.As we studied the architecture of all these sculptured Palæogæan cities, including
                that whose æon-dead corridors we were even then traversing, we were impressed by a
                curious coincidence which we have not yet tried to explain, even to ourselves. The tops of the buildings, which in the actual city around us had, of course, been
                weathered into shapeless ruins ages ago, were clearly displayed in the bas-reliefs,
                and showed vast clusters of needlelike spires, delicate finials on certain cone and
                pyramid apexes, and tiers of thin, horizontal scalloped disks capping cylindrical
                shafts.This was exactly what we had seen in that monstrous and portentous mirage, cast by a
                dead city whence such sky-line features had been absent for thousands and ten of
                thousands of years, which loomed on our ignorant eyes across the unfathomed
                mountains of madness as we first approached poor Lake's ill-fated camp.Of the life of the Old Ones, both under the sea and after part of them migrated to
                land, volumes could be written. Those in shallow water had continued the fullest use of the eyes at the ends of
                their five main head tentacles, and had practiced the arts of sculpture and of
                writing in quite the usual way--the writing accomplished with a stylus on waterproof
                waxen surfaces.Those lower down in the ocean depths, though they used a curious phosphorescent
                organism to furnish light, pieced out their vision with obscure special senses
                operating through the prismatic cilia on their heads--senses which rendered all the
                Old Ones partly independent of light in emergencies. Their forms of sculpture and writing had changed curiously during the descent,
                embodying certain apparently chemical coating processes--probably to secure
                phosphorescence--which the bas-reliefs could not make clear to us.The beings moved in the sea partly by swimming--using the lateral crinoid arms--and
                partly by wriggling with the lower tier of tentacles containing the pseudofeet. Occasionally they accomplished long swoops with the auxiliary use of two or more
                sets of their fan-like folding wings.On land they locally used the pseudofeet, but now and then flew to great heights or
                over long distances with their wings. The many slender tentacles into which the crinoid arms branched were infinitely
                delicate, flexible, strong, and accurate in muscular-nervous coördination--ensuring
                the utmost skill and dexterity in all artistic and other manual operations.The toughness of the things was almost incredible. Even the terrific pressure of the deepest sea bottoms appeared powerless to harm
                them. Very few seemed to die at all except by violence, and their burial places were very
                limited. The facts that they covered their vertically inhumed dead with five-pointed
                inscribed mounds set up thoughts in Danforth and me which made a fresh pause and
                recuperation necessary after the sculptures revealed it.[Illustration: _The toughness of the things was almost incredible. Even
                terrific pressures were powerless to harm them!The beings multiplied by means of spores--like vegetable pteridophyta, as Lake had
                suspected--but, owing to their prodigious toughness and longevity, and consequent
                lack of replacement needs, they did not encourage the large-scale development of new
                prothallia except when they had new regions to colonize.The young matured swiftly, and received an education evidently beyond any standard we
                can imagine. The prevailing intellectual and æsthetic life was highly evolved, and produced a
                tenaciously enduring set of customs and institutions which I shall describe more
                fully in my coming monograph. These varied slightly according to sea or land residence, but had the same
                foundations and essentials.Though able, like vegetables, to derive nourishment from inorganic substances; they
                vastly preferred organic and especially animal food. They ate uncooked marine life under the sea, but cooked their viands on land. They hunted game and raised meat herds--slaughtering with sharp weapons whose odd
                marks on certain fossil bones our expedition had noted.They resisted all ordinary temperatures marvelously, and in their natural state could
                live in water down to freezing. When the great chill of the Pleistocene drew on, however--nearly a million years
                ago--the land dwellers had to resort to special measures, including artificial
                heating--until, at last, the deadly cold appears to have driven them back into the
                sea.For their prehistoric flights through cosmic space, legend said, they had absorbed
                certain chemicals and become almost independent of eating, breathing, or heat
                conditions--but by the time of the great cold they had lost track of the method. In any case, they could not have prolonged the artificial state indefinitely without
                harm.Being nonpairing and semivegetable in structure, the Old Ones had no biological basis
                for the family phase of mammal life, but seemed to organize large households on the
                principles of comfortable space-utility and--as we deduced from the pictured
                occupations and diversions of codwellers--congenial mental association.In furnishing their homes they kept everything in the center of the huge rooms,
                leaving all wall spaces free for decorative treatment. Lighting, in the case of the land inhabitants, was accomplished by a device probably
                electro-chemical in nature.Both on land and under water they used curious tables, chairs and couches like
                cylindrical frames--for they rested and slept upright with folded-down
                tentacles--and racks for the hinged sets of dotted surfaces forming their books.Government was evidently complex and probably socialistic, though no certainties in
                this regard could be deduced from the sculptures we saw. There was extensive commerce, both local and between different cities--certain
                small, flat counters, five-pointed and inscribed, serving as money. Probably the smaller of the various greenish soapstones found by our expedition were
                pieces of such currency.Though the culture was mainly urban, some agriculture and much stock raising
                existed. Mining and a limited amount of manufacturing were also practiced. Travel was very frequent, but permanent migration seemed relatively rare except for
                the vast colonizing movements by which the race expanded.For personal locomotion no external aid was used, since in land, air, and water
                movement alike the Old Ones seemed to possess excessively vast capacities for
                speed. Loads, however, were drawn by beasts of burden--Shoggoths under the sea, and a
                curious variety of primitive vertebrates in the later years of land existence.These vertebrates, as well as an infinity of other life forms--animal and vegetable,
                marine, terrestrial, and aërial--were the products of unguided evolution acting on
                life cells made by the Old Ones, but escaping beyond their radius of attention. They had been suffered to develop unchecked because they had not come in conflict
                with the dominant beings. Bothersome forms, of course, were mechanically exterminated.It interested us to see in some of the very last and most decadent sculptures a
                shambling, primitive mammal, used sometimes for food and sometimes as an amusing
                buffoon by the land dwellers, whose vaguely simian and human foreshadowings were
                unmistakable. In the building of land cities the huge stone blocks of the high towers were
                generally lifted by vast-winged pterodactyls of a species heretofore unknown to
                palæontology.The persistence with which the Old Ones survived various geologic changes and
                convulsions of the earth's crust was little short of miraculous. Though few or none of their first cities seem to have remained beyond the Archæan
                Age, there was no interruption in their civilization or in the transmission of their
                records.Their original place of advent to the planet was the Antarctic Ocean, and it is
                likely that they came not long after the matter forming the moon was wrenched from
                the neighboring South Pacific. According to one of the sculptured maps, the whole globe was then under water, with
                stone cities scattered farther and farther from the antarctic as æons passed.Another map shows a vast bulk of dry land around the south pole, where it is evident
                that some of the beings made experimental settlements, though their main centers
                were transferred to the nearest sea bottom.Later maps, which display this land mass as cracking and drifting, and sending
                certain detached parts northward, uphold in a striking way the theories of
                continental drift lately advanced by Taylor, Wegener, and Joly.With the upheaval of new land in the South Pacific, tremendous events began. Some of the marine cities were hopelessly shattered, yet that was not the worst
                misfortune. Another race--a land race of beings shaped like octopi and probably corresponding to
                the fabulous prehuman spawn of Cthulhu--soon began filtering down from cosmic
                infinity and precipitated a monstrous war which for a time drove the Old Ones wholly
                back to the sea--a colossal blow in view of the increasing land settlements.Later, peace was made, and the new lands were given to the Cthulhu spawn whilst the
                Old Ones held the sea and the older lands. New land cities were founded--the greatest of them in the antarctic, for this region
                of first arrival was sacred.From then on, as before, the antarctic remained the center of the Old Ones'
                civilization, and all the cities built there by the Cthulhu spawn were blotted
                out.Then, suddenly, the lands of the Pacific sank again, taking with them the frightful
                stone city of R'lyeh and all the cosmic octopi, so that the Old Ones were again
                supreme on the planet, except for one shadowy fear about which they did not like to
                speak.At a rather later age their cities dotted all the land and water areas of the
                globe--hence the recommendation in my coming monograph that some archæologist make
                systematic borings with Pabodie's type of apparatus in certain widely separated
                regions.The steady trend down the ages was from water to land--a movement encouraged by the
                rise of new land masses, though the ocean was never wholly deserted. Another cause of the landward movement was the new difficulty in breeding and
                managing the Shoggoths upon which successful sea life depended.With the march of time, as the sculptures sadly confessed, the art of creating new
                life from inorganic matter had been lost, so that the Old Ones had to depend on the
                molding of forms already in existence. On land the great reptiles proved highly tractable; but the Shoggoths of the sea,
                reproducing by fission and acquiring a dangerous degree of accidental intelligence,
                presented for a time a formidable problem.They had always been controlled through the hypnotic suggestion of the Old Ones, and
                had modeled their tough plasticity into various useful temporary limbs and organs;
                but now their self-modeling powers were sometimes exercised independently, and in
                various imitative forms implanted by past suggestion. They had, it seems, developed a semistable brain whose separate and occasionally
                stubborn volition echoed the will of the Old Ones without always obeying it.Sculptured images of these Shoggoths filled Danforth and me with horror and
                loathing. They were normally shapeless entities composed of a viscous jelly which looked like
                an agglutination of bubbles, and each averaged about fifteen feet in diameter when a
                sphere. They had, however, a constantly shifting shape and volume--throwing out temporary
                developments or forming apparent organs of sight, hearing, and speech in imitation
                of their masters, either spontaneously or according to suggestion.They seem to have become peculiarly intractable toward the middle of the Permian Age,
                perhaps one hundred and fifty million years ago, when a veritable war of
                resubjugation was waged upon them by the marine Old Ones. Pictures of this war, and of the headless, slime-coated fashion in which the
                Shoggoths typically left their slain victims, held a marvelously fearsome quality
                despite the intervening abyss of untold ages.The Old Ones had used curious weapons of molecular disturbance against the rebel
                entities, and in the end had achieved a complete victory. Thereafter the sculptures showed a period in which Shoggoths were tamed and broken
                by armed Old Ones as the wild horses of the American west were tamed by cowboys.Though during the rebellion the Shoggoths had shown an ability to live out of water,
                this transition was not encouraged--since their usefulness on land would hardly have
                been commensurate with the trouble of their management.During the Jurassic Age the Old Ones met fresh adversity in the form of a new
                invasion from outer space--this time by half-fungous, half-crustacean
                creatures--creatures undoubtedly the same as those figuring in certain whispered
                hill legends of the north, and remembered in the Himalayas as the Mi-Go, or
                Abominable Snow Men.To fight these beings the Old Ones attempted, for the first time since their terrene
                advent, to sally forth again into the planetary ether; but, despite all traditional
                preparations, found it no longer possible to leave the earth's atmosphere. Whatever the old secret of interstellar travel had been, it was now definitely lost
                to the race.In the end the Mi-Go drove the Old Ones out of all the northern lands, though they
                were powerless to disturb those in the sea. Little by little the slow retreat of the elder race to their original antarctic
                habitat was beginning.It was curious to note from the pictured battles that both the Cthulhu spawn and the
                Mi-Go seem to have been composed of matter more widely different from that which we
                know than was the substance of the Old Ones. They were able to undergo transformations and reintegrations impossible for their
                adversaries, and seem therefore to have originally come from even remoter gulfs of
                cosmic space.The Old Ones, but for their abnormal toughness and peculiar vital properties, were
                strictly material, and must have had their absolute origin within the known
                space-time continuum--whereas the first sources of the other beings can only be
                guessed at with bated breath. All this, of course, assuming that the nonterrestrial linkages and the anomalies
                ascribed to the invading foes are not pure mythology. Conceivably, the Old Ones might have invented a cosmic framework to account for
                their occasional defeats, since historical interest and pride obviously formed their
                chief psychological element. It is significant that their annals failed to mention many advanced and potent races
                of beings whose mighty cultures and towering ethics figure persistently in certain
                obscure legends.The changing state of the world through long geologic ages appeared with startling
                vividness in many of the sculptured maps and scenes. In certain cases existing science will require revision, while in other cases its
                bold deductions are magnificently confirmed.As I have said, the hypothesis of Taylor, Wegener, and Joly that all the continents
                are fragments of an original antarctic land mass which cracked from centrifugal
                force and drifted apart over a technically viscous lower surface--an hypothesis
                suggested by such things as the complimentary outlines of Africa and South America,
                and the way the great mountain chains are rolled and shoved up--receives striking
                support from this uncanny source.Maps evidently showing the Carboniferous of a hundred million or more years ago
                displayed significant rifts and chasms destined later to separate Africa from the
                once continuous realms of Europe (then the Valusia of primal legend), Asia, the
                Americas, and the antarctic continent.Other charts--and most significantly one in connection with the founding fifty
                million years ago of the vast dead city around us--showed all the present continents
                well differentiated. And in the latest discoverable specimen--dating perhaps from the Pliocene Age--the
                approximate world of to-day appeared quite clearly despite the linkage of Alaska
                with Siberia, of North America with Europe through Greenland, and of South America
                with the antarctic continent through Graham Land.In the Carboniferous map the whole globe--ocean floor and rifted land mass
                alike--bore symbols of the Old Ones' vast stone cities, but in the later charts the
                gradual recession toward the antarctic became very plain.The final Pliocene specimen showed no land cities except on the antarctic continent
                and the tip of South America, nor any ocean cities north of the fiftieth parallel of
                South Latitude. Knowledge and interest in the northern world, save for a study of coast lines
                probably made during long exploration flights on those fan-like membranous wings,
                had evidently declined to zero among the Old Ones.Destruction of cities through the up-thrust of mountains, the centrifugal rending of
                continents, the seismic convulsions of land or sea bottom, and other natural causes
                was a matter of common record; and it was curious to observe how fewer and fewer
                replacements were made as the ages wore on.The vast dead megalopolis that yawned around us seemed to be the last general center
                of the race--built early in the Cretaceous Age after a titanic earth buckling had
                obliterated a still vaster predecessor not far distant.It appeared that this general region was the most sacred spot of all, where reputedly
                the first Old Ones had settled on a primal sea bottom. In the new city--many of whose features we could recognize in the sculptures, but
                which stretched fully a hundred miles along the mountain range in each direction
                beyond the farthest limits of our aërial survey--there were reputed to be preserved
                certain sacred stones forming part of the first sea-bottom city, which were thrust
                up to light after long epochs in the course of the general crumpling of strata. VIII.Naturally, Danforth and I studied with special interest and a peculiarly personal
                sense of awe everything pertaining to the immediate district in which we were. Of this local material there was naturally a vast abundance.On the tangled ground level of the city we were lucky enough to find a house of very
                late date whose walls, though somewhat damaged by a neighboring rift, contained
                sculptures of decadent workmanship carrying the story of the region, much beyond the
                Pliocene map, whence we derived our last general glimpse of the prehuman world. This was the last place we examined in detail, since what we found there set upon us
                a fresh, immediate objective.Certainly, we were in one of the strangest, weirdest, and most terrible of all the
                corners of earth's globe. Of all existing lands it was infinitely the most ancient. The conviction grew upon us that this hideous upland must indeed be the fabled
                nightmare plateau of Leng which even the mad author of the _Necronomicon_ was
                reluctant to discuss.The great mountain chain was tremendously long--starting as a low range at Luitpold
                Land on the coast of Weddell Sea and virtually crossing the entire continent. The really high part stretched in a mighty arc from about Latitude 82°, E. Longitude 60° to Latitude 70°, East Longitude 115°, with its concave side toward our
                camp and its seaward end in the region of that long, ice-locked coast whose hills
                were glimpsed by Wilkes and Mawson at the antarctic circle.Yet even more monstrous exaggerations of nature seemed disturbingly close at
                hand. I have said that these peaks are higher than the Himalayas, but the sculptures
                forbid me to say that they are earth's highest. That grim honor is beyond doubt reserved for something which half the sculptures
                hesitated to record at all, whilst others approached it with obvious repugnance and
                trepidation.It seems that there was one part of the ancient land--the first part that ever rose
                from the waters after the earth had flung off the moon and the Old Ones had seeped
                down from the stars--which had come to be shunned as vaguely and namelessly
                evil. Cities built there had crumbled before their time, and had been found suddenly
                deserted.Then when the first great earth buckling had convulsed the region in the Comanchean
                Age, a frightful line of peaks had shot suddenly up amidst the most appalling din
                and chaos--and earth had received her loftiest and most terrible mountains.If the scale of the carvings was correct, these abhorred things must have been much
                over forty thousand feet high--radically vaster than even the shocking mountains of
                madness we had crossed. They extended, it appeared, from about Latitude 77°, E. Longitude 70° to Latitude 70°, E. Longitude 100°--less than three hundred miles away from the dead city, so that we
                would have spied their dreaded summits in the dim western distance had it not been
                for that vague, opalescent haze. Their northern end must likewise be visible from the long antarctic circle coast
                line at Queen Mary Land.Some of the Old Ones, in the decadent days, had made strange prayers to those
                mountains--but none ever went near them or dared to guess what lay beyond. No human eye had ever seen them, and as I studied the emotions conveyed in the
                carvings I prayed that none ever might.There are protecting hills along the coast beyond them--Queen Mary and Kaiser Wilhelm
                Lands--and I thank Heaven no one has been able to land and climb those hills. I am not as sceptical about old tales and fears as I used to be, and I do not laugh
                now at the prehuman sculptor's notion that lightning paused meaningfully now and
                then at each of the brooding crests, and that an unexplained glow shone from one of
                those terrible pinnacles all through the long polar night. There may be a very real and very monstrous meaning in the old Pnakotic whispers
                about Kadath in the Cold Waste.But the terrain close at hand was hardly less strange, even if less namelessly
                accursed. Soon after the founding of the city the great mountain range became the seat of the
                principal temples, and many carvings showed what grotesque and fantastic towers had
                pierced the sky where now we saw only the curiously clinging cubes and ramparts.In the course of ages the caves had appeared, and had been shaped into adjuncts of
                the temples. With the advance of still later epochs all the limestone veins of the region were
                hollowed out by ground waters, so that the mountains, the foothills, and the plains
                below them were a veritable network of connected caverns and galleries. Many graphic sculptures told of explorations deep underground, and of the final
                discovery of the Stygian sunless sea that lurked at earth's bowels.This vast nighted gulf had undoubtedly been worn by the great river which flowed down
                from the nameless and horrible westward mountains, and which had formerly turned at
                the base of the Old Ones' range and flowed beside that chain into the Indian Ocean
                between Budd and Totten Lands on Wilkes's coast line. Little by little it had eaten away the limestone hill base at its turning, till at
                last its sapping currents reached the caverns of the ground waters and joined with
                them in digging a deeper abyss.Finally its whole bulk emptied into the hollow hills and left the old bed toward the
                ocean dry. Much of the later city as we now found it had been built over that former bed. The Old Ones, understanding what had happened, and exercising their always keen
                artistic sense, had carved into ornate pylons those headlands of the foothills where
                the great stream began its descent into eternal darkness.This river, once crossed by scores of noble stone bridges, was plainly the one whose
                extinct course we had seen in our aëroplane survey. Its position in different carvings of the city helped us to orient ourselves to the
                scene as it had been at various stages of the region's age-long, æon-dead history,
                so that we were able to sketch a hasty but careful map of the salient
                features--squares, important buildings, and the like--for guidance in further
                explorations.We could soon reconstruct in fancy the whole stupendous thing as it was a million or
                ten million or fifty million years ago, for the sculptures told us exactly what the
                buildings and mountains and squares and suburbs and landscape setting and luxuriant
                Tertiary vegetation had looked like.It must have had a marvelous and mystic beauty, and as I thought of it I almost
                forgot the clammy sense of sinister oppression with which the city's inhuman age and
                massiveness and deadness and remoteness and glacial twilight had choked and weighed
                on my spirit.Yet, according to certain carvings the denizens of that city had themselves known the
                clutch of oppressive terror; for there was a somber and recurrent type of scene in
                which the Old Ones were shown in the act of recoiling affrightedly from some
                object--never allowed to appear in the design--found in the great river and
                indicated as having been washed down through waving, vine-draped cycad forests from
                those horrible westward mountains.It was only in the one late-built house with the decadent carvings that we obtained
                any foreshadowing of the final calamity leading to the city's desertion. Undoubtedly there must have been many sculptures of the same age elsewhere, even
                allowing for the slackened energies and aspirations of a stressful and uncertain
                period; indeed, very certain evidence of the existence of others came to us shortly
                afterward. But this was the first and only set we directly encountered.We meant to look farther later on; but as I have said, immediate conditions dictated
                another present objective. There would, though, have been a limit--for after all hope of a long future
                occupancy of the place had perished among the Old Ones, there could not but have
                been a complete cessation of mural decoration. The ultimate blow, of course, was the coming of the great cold which once held most
                of the earth in thrall, and which has never departed from the ill-fated poles--the
                great cold that, at the world's other extremity, put an end to the fabled lands of
                Lomar and Hyperborea.Just when this tendency began in the antarctic it would be hard to say in terms of
                exact years. Nowadays we set the beginning of the general glacial periods at a distance of about
                five hundred thousand years from the present, but at the poles the terrible scourge
                must have commenced much earlier. All quantitative estimates are partly guesswork, but it is quite likely that the
                decadent sculptures were made considerably less than a million years ago, and that
                the actual desertion of the city was complete long before the conventional opening
                of the Pleistocene--five hundred thousand years ago--as reckoned in terms of the
                earth's whole surface.In the decadent sculptures there were signs of thinner vegetation everywhere, and of
                a decreased country life on the part of the Old Ones. Heating devices were shown in the houses, and winter travelers were represented as
                muffled in protective fabrics. Then we saw a series of cartouches--the continuous band arrangement being frequently
                interrupted in these late carvings--depicting a constantly growing migration to the
                nearest refuges of greater warmth--some fleeing to cities under the sea off the
                far-away coast, and some clambering down through networks of limestone caverns in
                the hollow hills to the neighboring black abyss of subterrane waters.In the end, it seems to have been the neighboring abyss which received the greatest
                colonization. This was partly due, no doubt, to the traditional sacredness of this special region,
                but may have been more conclusively determined by the opportunities it gave for
                continuing the use of the great temples on the honeycombed mountains, and for
                retaining the vast land city as a place of summer residence and base of
                communication with various mines.The linkage of old and new abodes was made more effective by means of several
                gradings and improvements along the connecting routes, including the chiseling of
                numerous direct tunnels from the ancient metropolis to the black abyss--sharply
                down-pointing tunnels whose mouths we carefully drew, according to our most
                thoughtful estimates, on the guide map we were compiling.It was obvious that at least two of these tunnels lay within a reasonable exploring
                distance of where we were--both being on the mountainward edge of the city, one less
                than a quarter of a mile toward the ancient rivercourse, and the other perhaps twice
                that distance in the opposite direction.The abyss, it seems, had shelving shores of dry land at certain places, but the Old
                Ones built their new city under water--no doubt because of its greater certainty of
                uniform warmth. The depth of the hidden sea appears to have been very great, so that the earth's
                internal heat could insure its habitability for an indefinite period.The beings seem to have had no trouble in adapting themselves to part-time--and
                eventually, of course, whole-time--residence under water, since they had never
                allowed their gill systems to atrophy.There were many sculptures which showed how they had always frequently visited their
                submarine kinsfolk elsewhere, and how they had habitually bathed on the deep bottom
                of their great river. The darkness of inner earth could likewise have been no deterrent to a race
                accustomed to long antarctic nights.Decadent though their style undoubtedly was, these latest carvings had a truly epic
                quality where they told of the building of the new city in the cavern sea. The Old Ones had gone about it scientifically--quarrying insoluble rocks from the
                heart of the honeycombed mountains, and employing expert workers from the nearest
                submarine city to perform the construction according to the best methods.These workers brought with them all that was necessary to establish the new
                venture--Shoggoth tissue from which to breed stone lifters and subsequent beasts of
                burden for the cavern city, and other protoplasmic matter to mold into
                phosphorescent organisms for lighting purposes.At last a mighty metropolis rose on the bottom of that Stygian sea, its architecture
                much like that of the city above, and its workmanship displaying relatively little
                decadence because of the precise mathematical element inherent in building
                operations.The newly bred Shoggoths grew to enormous size and singular intelligence, and were
                represented as taking and executing orders with marvelous quickness. They seemed to converse with the Old Ones by mimicking their voices--a sort of
                musical piping over a wide range, if poor Lake's dissection had indicated
                aright--and to work more from spoken commands than from hypnotic suggestions as in
                earlier times.They were, however, kept in admirable control. The phosphorescent organisms supplied light with vast effectiveness, and doubtless
                atoned for the loss of the familiar polar auroras of the outer-world night.Art and decoration were pursued, though, of course, with a certain decadence. The Old Ones seemed to realize this falling off themselves, and in many cases
                anticipated the policy of Constantine the Great by transplanting especially fine
                blocks of ancient carving from their land city, just as the emperor, in a similar
                age of decline, stripped Greece and Asia of their finest art to give his new
                Byzantine capital greater splendors than its own people could create. That the transfer of sculptured blocks had not been more extensive, was doubtless
                owing to the fact that the land city was not at first wholly abandoned.By the time total abandonment did occur--and it surely must have occurred before the
                polar Pleistocene was far advanced--the Old Ones had perhaps become satisfied with
                their decadent art--or had ceased to recognize the superior merit of the older
                carvings. At any rate, the æon-silent ruins around us had certainly undergone no wholesale
                sculptural denudation, though all the best separate statues, like other movables,
                had been taken away.The decadent cartouches and dados telling this story were, as I have said, the latest
                we could find in our limited search. They left us with a picture of the Old Ones shuttling back and forth betwixt the
                land city in summer and the sea-cavern city in winter, and sometimes trading with
                the sea-bottom cities off the antarctic coast.By this time the ultimate doom of the land city must have been recognized, for the
                sculptures showed many signs of the cold's malign encroachments. Vegetation was declining, and the terrible snows of the winter no longer melted
                completely even in midsummer.The saurian live stock were nearly all dead, and the mammals were standing it none
                too well. To keep on with the work of the upper world it had become necessary to adapt some of
                the amorphous and curiously cold-resistant Shoggoths to land life--a thing the Old
                Ones had formerly been reluctant to do. The great river was now lifeless, and the upper sea had lost most of its denizens
                except the seals and whales. All the birds had flown away, save only the great, grotesque penguins.What had happened afterward we could only guess. How long had the new sea-cavern city survived? Was it still down there, a stony corpse in eternal blackness? Had the subterranean waters frozen at last? To what fate had the ocean-bottom cities of the outer world been delivered? Had any of the Old Ones shifted north ahead of the creeping ice cap? Existing geology shows no trace of their presence. Had the frightful Mi-Go been still a menace in the outer land world of the
                north? Could one be sure of what might or might not linger, even to this day, in the
                lightless and unplumbed abysses of earth's deepest water?Those things had seemingly been able to withstand any amount of pressure--and men of
                the sea have fished up curious objects at times. And has the killer-whale theory really explained the savage and mysterious scars on
                antarctic seals noticed a generation ago by Borchgrevingk?The specimens found by poor Lake did not enter into these guesses, for their geologic
                setting proved them to have lived at what must have been a very early date in the
                land city's history. They were, according to their location, certainly not less than thirty million years
                old, and we reflected that in their day the sea-cavern city, and indeed the cavern
                itself, had had no existence.They would have remembered an older scene, with lush Tertiary vegetation everywhere,
                a younger land city of flourishing arts around them, and a great river sweeping
                northward along the base of the mighty mountains toward a far-away tropic ocean.And yet we could not help thinking about these specimens--especially about the eight
                perfect ones that were missing from Lake's hideously ravaged camp. There was something abnormal about that whole business--the strange things we had
                tried so hard to lay to somebody's madness--those frightful graves--the amount _and
                nature_ of the missing material--Gedney--the unearthly toughness of those archaic
                monstrosities, and the queer vital freaks the sculptures now showed the race to
                have----Danforth and I had seen a good deal in the last few hours, and were prepared
                to believe and keep silent about many appalling and incredible secrets of primal
                nature. IX.I have said that our study of the decadent sculptures brought about a change in our
                immediate objective. This, of course, had to do with the chiseled avenues to the black inner world, of
                whose existence we had not known before, but which we were now eager to find and
                traverse.From the evident scale of the carvings we deduced that a steeply descending walk of
                about a mile through either of the neighboring tunnels would bring us to the brink
                of the dizzy, sunless cliffs about the great abyss, down whose side paths, improved
                by the Old Ones, led to the rocky shore of the hidden and nighted ocean. To behold this fabulous gulf in stark reality was a lure which seemed impossible of
                resistance once we knew of the thing--yet we realized we must begin the quest at
                once if we expected to include it in our present trip.In was now eight p.m., and we had not enough battery replacements to let our torches burn on forever. We had done so much of our studying and copying below the glacial level that our
                battery supply had had at least five hours of nearly continuous use, and despite the
                special dry cell formula would obviously be good for only about four more--though by
                keeping one torch unused, except for especially interesting or difficult places, we
                might manage to eke out a safe margin beyond that.It would not do to be without a light in these Cyclopean catacombs, hence in order to
                make the abyss trip we must give up all further mural deciphering. Of course, we intended to revisit the place for days and perhaps weeks of intensive
                study and photography--curiosity having long ago gotten the better of horror--but
                just now we must hasten.Our supply of trail-blazing paper was far from unlimited, and we were reluctant to
                sacrifice spare notebooks or sketching paper to augment it, but we did let one large
                notebook go. If worst came to worst, we could resort to rock chipping--and, of course, it would
                be possible, even in case of really lost direction, to work up to full daylight by
                one channel or another if granted sufficient time for plentiful trial and error. So, at last, we set off eagerly in the indicated direction of the nearest
                tunnel.According to the carvings from which we had made our map, the desired tunnel mouth
                could not be much more than a quarter of a mile from where we stood; the intervening
                space showing solid-looking buildings quite likely to be penetrable still at a
                subglacial level. The opening itself would be in the basement--on the angle nearest the foothills--of
                a vast five-pointed structure of evidently public and perhaps ceremonial nature,
                which we tried to identify from our aërial survey of the ruins.No such structure came to our minds as we recalled our flight, hence we concluded
                that its upper parts had been greatly damaged, or that it had been totally shattered
                in an ice rift we had noticed. In the latter case the tunnel would probably turn out to be choked, so that we would
                have to try the next nearest one--the one less than a mile to the north.The intervening river course prevented our trying any of the more southern tunnels on
                this trip; and indeed, if both of the neighboring ones were choked it was doubtful
                whether our batteries would warrant an attempt on the next northerly one--about a
                mile beyond our second choice.As we threaded our dim way through the labyrinth with the aid of map and
                compass--traversing rooms and corridors in every stage of ruin or preservation,
                clambering up ramps, crossing upper floors and bridges and clambering down again,
                encountering choked doorways and piles of débris, hastening now and then along
                finely preserved and uncannily immaculate stretches, taking false leads and
                retracing our way (in such cases removing the blind paper trail we had left), and
                once in a while striking the bottom of an open shaft through which daylight poured
                or trickled down--we were repeatedly tantalized by the sculptured walls along our
                route.We had wormed our way very close to the computed site of the tunnel's mouth--having
                crossed a second-story bridge to what seemed plainly the tip of a pointed wall, and
                descended to a ruinous corridor especially rich in decadently elaborate and
                apparently ritualistic sculptures of late workmanship--when, about eight thirty
                p.m., Danforth's keen young nostrils gave us the first hint of something unusual.If we had had a dog with us, I suppost we would have been warned before. At first we could not precisely say what was wrong with the formerly crystal-pure
                air, but after a few seconds our memories reached only too definitely. Let me try to state the thing without flinching. There was an odor--and that odor was vaguely, subtly, and unmistakably akin to what
                had nauseated us upon opening the insane grave of the horror poor Lake had
                dissected.Of course, the revelation was not as clearly cut at the time as it sounds now. There were several conceivable explanations, and we did a good deal of indecisive
                whispering. Most important of all, we did not retreat without further investigation; for having
                come this far, we were loath to be balked by anything short of certain disaster.Anyway, what we must have suspected was altogether too wild to believe. Such things did not happen in any normal world. It was probably sheer irrational instinct which made us dim our single
                torch--tempted no longer by the decadent and sinister sculptures that leered
                menacingly from the oppressive walls--and which softened our progress to a cautious
                tiptoeing and crawling over the increasingly littered floor and heaps of débris.Danforth's eyes as well as nose proved better than mine, for it was likewise he who
                first noticed the queer aspect of the débris after we had passed many half-choked
                arches leading to chambers and corridors on the ground level. It did not look quite as it ought after countless thousands of years of desertion,
                and when we cautiously turned on more light we saw that a kind of swath seemed to
                have been lately tracked through it. The irregular nature of the latter precluded any definite marks, but in the smoother
                places there were suggestions of the dragging of heavy objects. Once we thought there was a hint of parallel tracks, as if of runners. This was what made us pause again.It was during that pause that we caught--simultaneously this time--the other odor
                ahead. Paradoxically, it was both a less frightful and a more frightful odor--less
                frightful intrinsically, but infinitely appalling in this place under the known
                circumstances--unless, of course, Gedney----For the odor was the plain and familiar
                one of common petrol--every-day gasoline.Our motivation after that is something I will leave to psychologists. We knew now that some terrible extension of the camp horrors must have crawled into
                this nighted burial place of the æons, hence could not doubt any longer the
                existence of nameless conditions--present or at least recent--just ahead. Yet in the end we did let sheer burning curiosity--or anxiety--or autohypnotism--or
                vague thoughts of responsibility toward Gedney--of what not--drive us on.Danforth whispered again of the print he thought he had seen at the alley turning in
                the ruins above; and of the faint musical piping--potentially of tremendous
                significance in the light of Lake's dissection report, despite its close resemblance
                to the cave-mouth echoes of the windy peaks--which he thought he had shortly
                afterward half heard from unknown depths below.But we could not convince each other, or even ourselves, of anything definite. We had turned off all light as we stood still, and vaguely noticed that a trace of
                deeply filtered upper daylight kept the blackness from being absolute.Having automatically begun to move ahead, we guided ourselves by occasional flashes
                from our torch. The disturbed débris formed an impression we could not shake off, and the smell of
                gasoline grew stronger. More and more ruin met our eyes and hampered our feet, until very soon we saw that
                the forward way was about to cease. We had been all too correct in our pessimistic guess about that rift glimpsed from
                the air. Our tunnel quest was a blind one, and we were not even going to be able to reach the
                basement out of which the abyssward aperture opened.The torch, flashing over the grotesquely carved walls of the blocked corridor in
                which we stood, showed several doorways in various states of obstruction; and from
                one of them the gasoline odor--quite submerging that other hint of odor--came with
                especial distinctness. As we looked more steadily, we saw that beyond a doubt there had been a slight and
                recent clearing away of débris from that particular opening. Whatever the lurking horror might be, we believed the direct avenue toward it was
                now plainly manifest. I do not think any one will wonder that we waited an appreciable time before making
                any further motion.And yet, when we did venture inside that black arch, our first impression was one of
                anticlimax. For amidst the littered expanse of that sculptured crypt--a perfect cube with sides
                of about twenty feet--there remained no recent object of instantly discernible size;
                so that we looked instinctively, though in vain, for a farther doorway.In another moment, however, Danforth's sharp vision had discovered a place where the
                floor débris had been disturbed. We turned on both torches full strength. Though what we saw in that light was actually simple and trifling, I am none the
                less reluctant to tell of it because of what it implied.It was a rough leveling of the débris, upon which several small objects lay
                carelessly scattered, and at one corner of which a considerable amount of gasoline
                must have been spilled lately enough to leave a strong odor even at this extreme
                superplateau altitude. In other words, it could not be other than a sort of camp--a camp made by questing
                beings who, like us, had been turned back by the unexpectedly choked way to the
                abyss.Let me be plain. The scattered objects were, so far as substance was concerned, all from Lake's camp,
                and consisted of: tin cans as queerly opened as those we had seen at that ravaged
                place, many spent matches, three illustrated books more or less curiously smudged,
                an empty ink bottle with its pictorial and instructional carton, a broken fountain
                pen, some oddly snipped fragments of fur and tent cloth, a used electric battery
                with circular of directions, a folder that came with our type of tent heater, and a
                sprinkling of crumpled papers.It was all bad enough, but when we smoothed out the papers and looked at what was on
                them we felt we had come to the worst. We had found certain inexplicably blotted papers at the camp which might have
                prepared us, yet the effect of the sight, down there in the prehuman vaults of a
                nightmare city, was almost too much to bear.A mad Gedney might have made the groups of dots in imitation of those found on the
                greenish soapstones, just as the dots on those insane five-pointed grave mounds
                might have been made; and he might conceivably have prepared rough, hasty
                sketches--varying in their accuracy--or lack of it--which outlined the neighboring
                parts of the city and traced the way from a circularly represented place outside our
                previous route--a place we identified as a great cylindrical tower in the carvings
                and as a vast circular gulf glimpsed in our aërial survey--to the present
                five-pointed structure and the tunnel mouth therein.He might, I repeat, have prepared such sketches; for those before us were quite
                obviously compiled, as our own had been, from late sculptures somewhere in the
                glacial labyrinth, though not from the ones which we had seen and used. But what this art-blind bungler could never have done was to execute those sketches
                in a strange and assured technique perhaps superior, despite haste and carelessness,
                to any of the decadent carvings from which they were taken--the characteristic and
                unmistakable technique of the Old Ones themselves in the dead city's heyday.There are those who will say Danforth and I were utterly mad not to flee for our
                lives after that; since our conclusions were now--notwithstanding their
                wildness--completely fixed, and of a nature I need not even mention to those who
                have read my account as far as this. Perhaps we were mad--for have I not said those horrible peaks were mountains of
                madness? But I think I can detect something of the same spirit--albeit in a less extreme
                form--in the men who stalk deadly beasts through African jungles to photograph them
                or study their habits. Half paralyzed with terror though we were, there was nevertheless fanned within us a
                blazing flame of awe and curiosity which triumphed in the end.Of course, we did not mean to face that--or those--which we knew had been there, but
                we felt that they must be gone by now. They would by this time have found the other neighboring entrance to the abyss, and
                have passed within, to whatever night-black fragments of the past might await them
                in the ultimate gulf--the ultimate gulf they had never seen. Or if that entrance, too, was blocked, they would have gone on to the north seeking
                another. They were, we remembered, partly independent of light.Looking back to that moment, I can scarcely recall just what precise form our new
                emotions took--just what change of immediate objective it was that so sharpened our
                sense of expectancy. We certainly did not mean to face what we feared--yet I will not deny that we may
                have had a lurking, unconscious wish to spy certain things from some hidden vantage
                point.Probably we had not given up our zeal to glimpse the abyss itself, though there was
                interposed a new goal in the form of that great circular place shown on the crumpled
                sketches we had found. We had at once recognized it as a monstrous cylindrical tower in the carvings, but
                appearing only as a prodigious, round aperture from above.Something about the impressiveness of its rendering, even in these hasty diagrams,
                made us think that its subglacial levels must still form a feature of peculiar
                importance. Perhaps it embodied architectural marvels as yet unencountered by us. It was certainly of incredible age, according to the sculptures in which it
                figured--being indeed among the first things built in the city. Its carvings, if preserved, could not but be highly significant. Moreover, it might form a good present link with the upper world--a shorter route
                than the one we were so carefully blazing and probably that by which those others
                had descended.At any rate, the thing we did was to study the terrible sketches--which quite
                perfectly confirmed our own--and start back over the indicated course to the
                circular place; the course which our nameless predecessors must have traversed twice
                before us. The other neighboring gate to the abyss would lie beyond that. I need not speak of our journey--during which we continued to leave an economical
                trail of paper--for it was precisely the same in kind as that by which we had
                reached the cul-de-sac, except that it tended to adhere more closely to the ground
                level and even descend to basement corridors.Every now and then we could trace certain disturbing marks in the débris or litter
                underfoot; and, after we had passed outside the radius of the gasoline scent, we
                were again faintly conscious--spasmodically--of that more hideous and more
                persistent scent. After the way had branched from our former course, we sometimes gave the rays of our
                single torch a furtive sweep along the walls; noting in almost every case the
                well-nigh omnipresent sculptures, which indeed seem to have formed a main æsthetic
                outlet for the Old Ones.About nine-thirty p.m., while traversing a vaulted corridor whose increasingly glaciated floor seemed
                somewhat below the ground level and whose roof grew lower as we advanced, we began
                to see strong daylight ahead and were able to turn off our torch. It appeared that we were coming to the vast, circular place, and that our distance
                from the upper air could not be very great.The corridor ended in an arch, surprisingly low for these megalithic ruins, but we
                could see much through it even before we emerged. Beyond, there stretched a prodigious round space--fully two hundred feet in
                diameter--strewn with débris and containing many choked archways corresponding to
                the one we were about to cross. The walls were--in available spaces--boldly sculptured into a spiral band of heroic
                proportions; and displayed, despite the destructive weathering caused by the
                openness of the spot, an artistic splendor far beyond anything we had encountered
                before. The littered floor was quite heavily glaciated, and we fancied that the true bottom
                lay at a considerably lower depth.But the salient object of the place was the titanic stone ramp which, eluding the
                archways by a sharp turn outward into the open floor, wound spirally up the
                stupendous cylindrical wall like an inside counterpart of those once climbing
                outside the monstrous towers or zikkurats of antique Babylon. Only the rapidity of our flight, and the perspective which confounded the descent
                with the tower's inner wall, had prevented our noticing this feature from the air,
                and thus caused us to seek another avenue to the subglacial level.Pabodie might have been able to tell what sort of engineering held it in place, but
                Danforth and I could merely admire and marvel. We could see mighty stone corbels and pillars here and there, but what we saw seemed
                inadequate to the function performed. The thing was excellently preserved up to the present top of the tower--a highly
                remarkable circumstance in view of its exposure--and its shelter had done much to
                protect the bizarre and disturbing cosmic sculptures on the walls.As we stepped out into the awesome half daylight of this monstrous cylinder
                bottom--fifty million years old, and without doubt the most primally ancient
                structure ever to meet our eyes--we saw that the ramp-traversed sides stretched
                dizzily up to a height of fully sixty feet.This, we recalled from our aërial survey, meant an outside glaciation of some forty
                feet; since the yawning gulf we had seen from the plane had been at the top of an
                approximately twenty-foot mound of crumbled masonry, somewhat sheltered for three
                fourths of its circumference by the massive curving walls of a line of higher
                ruins. According to the sculptures the original tower had stood in the center of an immense
                circular plaza, and had been perhaps five hundred or six hundred feet high, with
                tiers of horizontal disks near the top, and a row of needlelike spires along the
                upper rim.Most of the masonry had obviously toppled outward rather than inward--a fortunate
                happening, since otherwise the ramp might have been shattered and the whole interior
                choked. As it was, the ramp showed sad battering; whilst the choking was such that all the
                archways seemed to have been half cleared.It took us only a moment to conclude that this was indeed the route by which those
                others had descended, and that this would be the logical route for our own ascent,
                despite the long trail of paper we had left elsewhere. The tower's mouth was no farther from the foothills and our waiting plane than was
                the great terraced building we had entered, and any further subglacial exploration
                we might make on this trip would lie in this general region.Oddly, we were still thinking about possible later trips--even after all we had seen
                and guessed. Then, as we picked our way cautiously over the débris of the great floor, there came
                a sight which for the time excluded all other matters.It was the neatly huddled array of three sledges in that farther angle of the ramp's
                lower and outward-projecting course which had hitherto been screened from our
                view. There they were--the three sledges missing from Lake's camp--shaken by a hard usage
                which must have included forcible dragging along great reaches of snowless masonry
                and débris, as well as much hand portage over utterly unnavigable places.They were carefully and intelligently packed and strapped, and contained things
                memorably familiar enough: the gasoline stove, fuel cans, instrument cases,
                provision tins, tarpaulins obviously bulging with books, and some bulging with less
                obvious contents--everything derived from Lake's equipment.After what we had found in that other room, we were in a measure prepared for this
                encounter. The really great shock came when we stepped over and undid one tarpaulin, whose
                outlines had peculiarly disquieted us. It seems that others as well as Lake had been interested in collecting typical
                specimens; for there were two here, both stiffly frozen, perfectly preserved,
                patched with adhesive plaster where some wounds around the neck had occurred, and
                wrapped with care to prevent further damage. They were the bodies of young Gedney and the missing dog. X.Many people will probably judge us callous as well as mad for thinking about the
                northward tunnel and the abyss so soon after our somber discovery, and I am not
                prepared to say that we would have immediately revived such thoughts but for a
                specific circumstance which broke in upon us and set up a whole new train of
                speculations.We had replaced the tarpaulin over poor Gedney and were standing in a kind of mute
                bewilderment when the sounds finally reached our consciousness--the first sounds we
                had heard since descending out of the open where the mountain wind whined faintly
                from its unearthly heights. Well-known and mundane though they were, their presence in this remote world of
                death was more unexpected and unnerving than any grotesque or fabulous tones could
                possibly have been--since they gave a fresh upsetting to all our notions of cosmic
                harmony.Had it been some trace of that bizarre musical piping over a wide range, which Lake's
                dissection report had led us to expect in those others--and which, indeed, our
                overwrought fancies had been reading into every wind howl we had heard since coming
                on the camp horror--it would have had a kind of hellish congruity with the æon-dead
                region around us. A voice from other epochs belongs in a graveyard of other epochs.As it was, however, the noise shattered all our profoundly seated adjustments--all
                out tacit acceptance of the inner antarctic as a waste utterly and irrevocably void
                of every vestige of normal life.What we heard was not the fabulous note of any buried blasphemy of elder earth from
                whose supernal toughness an age-denied polar sun had evoked a monstrous
                response. Instead, it was a thing so mockingly normal and so unerringly familiarized by our
                sea days off Victoria Land and our camp days at McMurdo Sound that we shuddered to
                think of it here, where such things ought not to be. To be brief--it was simply the raucous squawking of a penguin.The muffled sound floated from subglacial recesses nearly opposite to the corridor
                whence we had come--regions manifestly in the direction of that other tunnel to the
                vast abyss. The presence of a living water bird in such a direction--in a world whose surface
                was one of age-long and uniform lifelessness--could lead to only one conclusion;
                hence our first thought was to verify the objective reality of the sound. It was, indeed, repeated, and seemed at times to come from more than one throat.Seeking its source, we entered an archway from which much débris had been cleared;
                resuming our trail blazing--with an added paper supply taken with curious repugnance
                from one of the tarpaulin bundles on the sledges--when we left daylight behind.As the glaciated floor gave place to a litter of detritus, we plainly discerned some
                curious, dragging tracks; and once Danforth found a distinct print of a sort whose
                description would be only too superfluous. The course indicated by the penguin cries was precisely what our map and compass
                prescribed as an approach to the more northerly tunnel mouth, and we were glad to
                find that a bridgeless thoroughfare on the ground and basement levels seemed
                open.The tunnel, according to the chart, ought to start from the basement of a large
                pyramidal structure which we seemed vaguely to recall from our aërial survey as
                remarkably well-preserved. Along our path the single torch showed a customary profusion of carvings, but we did
                not pause to examine any of these.Suddenly a bulky white shape loomed up ahead of us, and we flashed on the second
                torch. It is odd how wholly this new quest had turned our minds from earlier fears of what
                might lurk near. Those other ones, having left their supplies in the great circular place, must have
                planned to return after their scouting trip toward or into the abyss; yet we had now
                discarded all caution concerning them as completely as if they had never
                existed.This white, waddling thing was fully six feet high, yet we seemed to realize at once
                that it was not one of those others. They were larger and dark, and, according to the sculptures, their motion over land
                surfaces was a swift, assured matter despite the queerness of their sea-born
                tentacle equipment. But to say that the white thing did not profoundly frighten us would be vain. We were indeed clutched for an instant by a primitive dread almost sharper than the
                worst of our reasoned fears regarding those others.Then came a flash of anticlimax as the white shape sidled into a lateral archway to
                our left, to join two others of its kind which had summoned it in raucous tones. For it was only a penguin--albeit of a huge, unknown species larger than the
                greatest of the known king penguins, and monstrous in its combined albinism and
                virtual eyelessness.When we had followed the thing into the archway and turned both our torches on the
                indifferent and unheeding group of three, we saw that they were all eyeless albinos
                of the same unknown and gigantic species.Their size reminded us of some of the archaic penguins depicted in the Old Ones'
                sculptures, and it did not take us long to conclude that they were descended from
                the same stock--undoubtedly surviving through a retreat to some warmer inner region
                whose perpetual blackness had destroyed their pigmentation and atrophied their eyes
                to mere useless slits.That their present habitat was the vast abyss we sought, was not for a moment to be
                doubted; and this evidence of the gulf's continued warmth and habitability filled us
                with the most curious and subtly perturbing fancies.We wondered, too, what had caused these three birds to venture out of their usual
                domain. The state and silence of the great dead city made it clear that it had at no time
                been a habitual seasonal rookery, whilst the manifest indifference of the trio to
                our presence made it seem odd that any passing party of those others should have
                startled them.Was it possible that those others had taken some aggressive notion or tried to
                increase their meat supply? We doubted whether that pungent odor which the dogs had hated could cause an equal
                antipathy in these penguins; since their ancestors had obviously lived on excellent
                terms with the Old Ones--an amicable relationship which must have survived in the
                abyss below as long as any of the Old Ones remained.Regretting--in a flare-up of the old spirit of pure science--that we could not
                photograph these anomalous creatures, we shortly left them to their squawking and
                pushed on toward the abyss whose openness was now so positively proved to us, and
                whose exact direction occasional penguin tracks made clear.Not long afterward a steep descent in a long, low, doorless, and peculiarly
                sculptureless corridor led us to believe that we were approaching the tunnel mouth
                at last. We had passed two more penguins.Then the corridor ended in a prodigious open space which made us gasp
                involuntarily--a perfect inverted hemisphere, obviously deep underground, fully a
                hundred feet in diameter and fifty feet high, with low archways opening around all
                parts of the circumference but one, and that one yawning cavernously with a black,
                arched aperture which broke the symmetry of the vault to a height of nearly fifteen
                feet. It was the entrance to the great abyss.In this vast hemisphere, whose concave roof was impressively though decadently carved
                to a likeness of the primordial celestial dome, a few albino penguins
                waddled--aliens there, but indifferent and unseeing. The black tunnel yawned indefinitely off at a steep, descending grade, its aperture
                adorned with grotesquely chiseled jambs and lintel.From that cryptical mouth we fancied a current of slightly warmer air and perhaps
                even a suspicion of vapor proceeded; and we wondered what living entities other than
                penguins the limitless void below, and the contiguous honeycombings of the land and
                the titan mountains, might conceal.We wondered, too, whether the trace of mountaintop smoke at first suspected by poor
                Lake, as well as the odd haze we had ourselves perceived around the rampart-crowned
                peak, might not be caused by the tortuous-channeled rising of some such vapor from
                the unfathomed regions of earth's core.Entering the tunnel, we saw that its outline was--at least at the start--about
                fifteen feet each way--sides, floor, and arched roof composed of the usual
                megalithic masonry. The sides were sparsely decorated with cartouches of conventional designs in a
                later, decadent style; and all the construction and carving were marvellously
                well-preserved.The floor was quite clear, except for a slight detritus bearing outgoing penguin
                tracks and the inward tracks of those others. The farther one advanced, the warmer it became; so that we were soon unbuttoning our
                heavy garments. We wondered whether there were any actually igneous manifestations below, and
                whether the waters of that sunless sea were hot.After a short distance the masonry gave place to solid rock, though the tunnel kept
                the same proportions and presented the same aspect of carved regularity. Occasionally its varying grade became so steep that grooves were cut in the
                floor.Several times we noted the mouths of small lateral galleries not recorded in our
                diagrams; none of them such as to complicate the problem of our return, and all of
                them welcome as possible refuges in case we met unwelcome entities on their way back
                from the abyss.The nameless scent of such things was very distinct. Doubtless it was suicidally foolish to venture into that tunnel under the known
                conditions, but the lure of the unplumbed is stronger in certain persons than most
                suspect--indeed, it was just such a lure which had brought us to this unearthly
                polar waste in the first place.We saw several penguins as we passed along, and speculated on the distance we would
                have to traverse. The carvings had led us to expect a steep downhill walk of about a mile to the
                abyss, but our previous wanderings had shown us that matters of scale were not
                wholly to be depended on.After about a quarter of a mile that nameless scent became greatly accentuated, and
                we kept very careful track of the various lateral openings we passed. There was no visible vapor as at the mouth, but this was doubtless due to the lack
                of contrasting cooler air. The temperature was rapidly ascending, and we were not surprised to come upon a
                careless heap of material shudderingly familiar to us. It was composed of furs and tent cloths taken from Lake's camp, and we did not pause
                to study the bizarre forms into which the fabrics had been slashed.Slightly beyond this point we noticed a decided increase in the size and number of
                the side galleries, and concluded that the densely honeycombed region beneath the
                higher foothills must now have been reached.The nameless scent was now curiously mixed with another and scarcely less offensive
                odor--of what nature we could not guess, though we thought of decaying organisms and
                perhaps unknown subterrane fungi.Then came a startling expansion of the tunnel for which the carvings had not prepared
                us--a broadening and rising into a lofty, natural-looking elliptical cavern with a
                level floor, some seventy-five feet long and fifty broad, and with many immense side
                passages leading away into cryptical darkness.Though this cavern was natural in appearance, an inspection with both torches
                suggested that it had been formed by the artificial destruction of several walls
                between adjacent honeycombings. The walls were rough, and the high, vaulted roof was thick with stalactites; but the
                solid rock floor had been smoothed off, and was free from all débris, detritus, or
                even dust to a positively abnormal extent.Except for the avenue through which we had come, this was true of the floors of all
                the great galleries opening off from it; and the singularity of the condition was
                such as to set us vainly puzzling.The curious new fetor which had supplemented the nameless scent was excessively
                pungent here; so much so that it destroyed all trace of the other. Something about this whole place, with its polished and almost glistening floor,
                struck us as more vaguely baffling and horrible than any of the monstrous things we
                have previously encountered.The regularity of the passage immediately ahead, prevented all confusion as to the
                right course amidst this plethora of equally great cave mouths. Nevertheless we resolved to resume our paper trail blazing if any further complexity
                should develop; for dust tracks, of course, could no longer be expected.Upon resuming our direct progress we cast a beam of torchlight over the tunnel
                walls--and stopped short in amazement at the supremely radical change which had come
                over the carvings in this part of the passage. We realized, of course, the great decadence of the Old Ones' sculpture at the time
                of the tunneling, and had indeed noticed the inferior workmanship of the arabesques
                in the stretches behind us.But now, in this deeper section beyond the cavern, there was a sudden difference
                wholly transcending explanation--a difference in basic nature as well as in mere
                quality, and involving so profound and calamitous a degradation of skill that
                nothing in the hitherto observed rate of decline could have led one to expect
                it.This new and degenerate work was coarse, bold, and wholly lacking in delicacy of
                detail. It was countersunk with exaggerated depth in bands following the same general line
                as the sparse cartouches of the earlier sections, but the height of the reliefs did
                not reach the level of the general surface.Danforth had the idea that it was a second carving--a sort of palimpsest formed after
                the obliteration of a previous design. In nature it was wholly decorative and conventional, and consisted of crude spirals
                and angles roughly following the quintile mathematical tradition of the Old Ones,
                yet seeming more like a parody than a perpetuation of that tradition.Since we could not afford to spend any considerable time in study, we resumed our
                advance after a cursory look.We saw and heard fewer penguins, but thought we caught a vague suspicion of an
                infinitely distant chorus of them somewhere deep within the earth. The new and inexplicable odor was abominably strong, and we could detect scarcely a
                sign of that other nameless scent.Puffs of visible vapor ahead bespoke increasing contrasts in temperature, and the
                relative nearness of the sunless sea cliffs of the great abyss. Then, quite unexpectedly, we saw certain obstructions on the polished floor
                ahead--obstructions which were quite definitely not penguins--and turned on our
                second torch after making sure that the objects were quite stationary. XI.Still another time have I come to a place where it is very difficult to proceed. I ought to be hardened by this stage; but there are some experiences and intimations
                which scar too deeply to permit of healing, and leave only such added sensitiveness
                that memory re-inspired all the original horror.We saw, as I have said, certain obstructions on the polished floor ahead; and I may
                add that our nostrils were assailed almost simultaneously by a very curious
                intensification of the strange, prevailing fetor, now quite plainly mixed with the
                nameless stench of those others which had gone before us.The light of the second torch left no doubt of what the obstructions were, and we
                dared approach them only because we could see, even from a distance, that they were
                quite as past all harming power as had been the six similar specimens unearthed from
                the monstrous star-mounded graves at poor Lake's camp.They were, indeed, as lacking in completeness as most of those we had
                unearthed--though it grew plain from the thick, dark-green pool gathering around
                them that their incompleteness was of infinitely greater recency. There seemed to be only four of them, whereas Lake's bulletins would have suggested
                no less than eight as forming the group which had preceded us. To find them in this state was wholly unexpected, and we wondered what sort of
                monstrous struggle had occurred down here in the dark.Penguins, attacked in a body, retaliate savagely with their beaks; and our ears now
                made certain the existence of a rookery far beyond. Had those others disturbed such a place and aroused murderous pursuit? The obstructions did not suggest it, for penguin beaks against the tough tissues
                Lake had dissected could hardly account for the terrible damage our approaching
                glance was beginning to make out. Besides, the huge blind birds we had seen appeared to be singularly peaceful.Had there, then, been a struggle among those others, and were the absent four
                responsible? If so, where were they? Were they close at hand and likely to form an immediate menace to us? We glanced anxiously at some of the smooth-floored lateral passages as we continued
                our slow and frankly reluctant approach.Whatever the conflict was, it had clearly been that which had frightened the penguins
                into their unaccustomed wandering. It must, then, have arisen near that faintly heard rookery in the incalculable gulf
                beyond, since there were no signs that any birds had normally dwelt here.Perhaps, we reflected, there had been a hideous running fight, with the weaker party
                seeking to get back to the cached sledges when their pursuers finished them. One could picture the demonic fray between namelessly monstrous entities as it
                surged out of the black abyss with great clouds of frantic penguins squawking and
                scurrying ahead.I say that we approached those sprawling and incomplete obstructions slowly and
                reluctantly. Would to Heaven we had never approached them at all, but had run back at top speed
                out of that blasphemous tunnel with the greasily smooth floors and the degenerate
                murals aping and mocking the things they had superseded--run back, before we had
                seen what we did see, and before our minds were burned with something which will
                never let us breathe easily again!Both of our torches were turned on the prostrate objects, so that we soon realized
                the dominant factor in their incompleteness. Mauled, compressed, twisted, and ruptured as they were, their chief common injury
                was total decapitation.From each one the tentacled starfish head had been removed; and as we drew near we
                saw that the manner of removal looked more like some hellish tearing or suction than
                like any ordinary form of cleavage.Their noisome dark-green ichor formed a large, spreading pool; but its stench was
                half overshadowed by that newer and stranger stench, here more pungent than at any
                other point along our route.Only when we had come very close to the sprawling obstructions could we trace that
                second, unexplainable fetor to any immediate source--and the instant we did so
                Danforth, remembering certain very vivid sculptures of the Old Ones' history in the
                Permian Age one hundred and fifty million years ago, gave vent to a nerve-tortured
                cry which echoed hysterically through that vaulted and archaic passage with the
                evil, palimpsest carvings.I came only just short of echoing his cry myself; for I had seen those primal
                sculptures, too, and had shudderingly admired the way the nameless artist had
                suggested that hideous slime coating found on certain incomplete and prostrate Old
                Ones--those whom the frightful Shoggoths had characteristically slain and sucked to
                a ghastly headlessness in the great war of resubjugation.They were infamous, nightmare sculptures even when telling of age-old, bygone things;
                for Shoggoths and their work ought not to be seen by human beings or portrayed by
                any beings.The mad author of the _Necronomicon_ had nervously tried to swear that none had been
                bred on this planet, and that only drugged dreamers had ever conceived them. Formless protoplasm able to mock and reflect all forms and organs and
                processes--viscous agglutinations of bubbling cells--rubbery fifteen-foot spheroids
                infinitely plastic and ductile--slaves of suggestion, builders of cities--more and
                more sullen, more and more intelligent, more and more amphibious, more and more
                imitative! Great Heaven! What madness made even those blasphemous Old Ones willing to use and to carve such
                things?And now, when Danforth and I saw the freshly glistening and reflectively iridescent
                black slime which clung thickly to those headless bodies and stank obscenely with
                that new, unknown odor whose cause only a diseased fancy could envisage--clung to
                those bodies and sparkled less voluminously on a smooth part of the accursedly
                resculptured wall in a series of grouped dots--we understood the quality of cosmic
                fear to its uttermost depths.It was not fear of those four missing others--for all too well did we suspect they
                would do no harm again. Poor devils! After all, they were not evil things of their kind. They were the men of another age and another order of being. Nature had played a hellish jest on them--as it will on any others that human
                madness, callousness, or cruelty may hereafter drag up in that hideously dead or
                sleeping polar waste--and this was their tragic homecoming.They had not been even savages--for what indeed had they done? That awful awakening in the cold of an unknown epoch--perhaps an attack by the
                furry, frantically barking quadrupeds, and a dazed defense against them and the
                equally frantic white simians with the queer wrappings and paraphernalia! Poor Lake. Poor Gedney. And poor Old Ones! Scientists to the last--what had they done that we would not have done in their
                place? Lord, what intelligence and persistence! What a facing of the incredible, just as those carven kinsmen and forbears had faced
                things only a little less incredible! Radiates, vegetables, monstrosities, star spawn--whatever they had been, they were
                men!They had crossed the icy peaks on whose templed slopes they had once worshiped and
                roamed among the tree ferns. They had found their dead city brooding under its curse, and had read its carven
                latter days as we had done. They had tried to reach their living fellows in fabled depths of blackness they had
                never seen--and what had they found?All this flashed in unison through the thoughts of Danforth and me as we looked from
                those headless, slime-coated shapes to the loathsome palimpsest sculptures and the
                diabolical dot groups of fresh slime on the wall beside them--looked and understood
                what must have triumphed and survived down there in the Cyclopean water city of that
                nighted, penguin-fringed abyss, whence even now a sinister curling mist had begun to
                belch pallidly as if in answer to Danforth's hysterical scream.The shock of recognizing that monstrous slime and headlessness had frozen us into
                mute, motionless statues, and it is only through later conversations that we have
                learned of the complete identity of our thoughts at that moment.It seemed æons that we stood there, but actually it could not have been more than ten
                or fifteen seconds. That hateful, pallid mist curled forward as if veritably driven by some remoter
                advancing bulk--and then came a sound which upset much of what we had just decided,
                and in so doing broke the spell and enabled us to run like mad past squawking,
                confused penguins over our former trail back to the city, along ice-sunken
                megalithic corridors to the great open circle, and up that archaic spiral ramp in a
                frenzied, automatic plunge for the sane outer air and light of day.The new sound, as I have intimated, upset much that we had decided; because it was
                what poor Lake's dissection had led us to attribute to those we had just judged
                dead. It was, Danforth later told me, precisely what he had caught in infinitely muffled
                form when at that spot beyond the alley corner above the glacial level; and it
                certainly had a shocking resemblance to the wind pipings we had both heard around
                the lofty mountain caves.At the risk of seeming puerile I will add another thing, too, if only because of
                the surprising way Danforth's impression chimed with mine.It will be remembered that in that fantastic tale there is a word of unknown but
                terrible and prodigious significance connected with the antarctic and screamed
                eternally by the gigantic, spectrally snowy birds of that malign region's core.We were in full flight before three notes or syllables had been uttered, though we
                knew that the swiftness of the Old Ones would enable any scream-roused and pursuing
                survivor of the slaughter to overtake us in a moment if it really wished to do
                so.We had a vague hope, however, that nonaggressive conduct and a display of kindred
                reason might cause such a being to spare us in case of capture, if only from
                scientific curiosity.After all, if such a one had nothing to fear for itself it would have no motive in
                harming us. Concealment being futile at this juncture, we used our torch for
                a running glance behind, and perceived that the mist was thinning. Would we
                see at last, a complete and living specimen of those others?Then, noting that we were actually gaining on our pursuer, it occurred to us that the
                entity might be wounded. We could take no chances, however, since it was very obviously approaching in answer
                to Danforth's scream, rather than in flight from any other entity. The timing was too close to admit of doubt.Of the whereabouts of that less conceivable and less mentionable nightmare--that
                fetid, unglimpsed mountain of slime-spewing protoplasm whose race had conquered the
                abyss and sent land pioneers to recarve and squirm through the burrows of the
                hills--we could form no guess; and it cost us a genuine pang to leave this probably
                crippled Old One--perhaps a lone survivor--to the peril of recapture and a nameless
                fate.Thank Heaven we did not slacken our run. The curling mist had thickened again, and was driving ahead with increased speed;
                whilst the straying penguins in our rear were squawking and screaming and displaying
                signs of a panic really surprising in view of their relatively minor confusion when
                we had passed them.Our recklessly used torch now revealed ahead of us the large open cavern where
                various ways converged, and we were glad to be leaving those morbid palimpsest
                sculptures--almost felt even when scarcely seen--behind.Another thought which the advent of the cave inspired was the possibility of losing
                our pursuer at this bewildering focus of large galleries. There were several of the blind albino penguins in the open space, and it seemed
                clear that their fear of the oncoming entity was extreme to the point of
                unaccountability.If at that point we dimmed our torch to the very lowest limit of traveling need,
                keeping it strictly in front of us, the frightened squawking motions of the huge
                birds in the mist might muffle our footfalls, screen our true course, and somehow
                set up a false lead.Amidst the churning, spiraling fog, the littered and unglistening floor of the main
                tunnel beyond this point, as differing from the other morbidly polished burrows,
                could hardly form a highly distinguishing feature; even, so far as we could
                conjecture, for those indicated special senses which made the Old Ones partly,
                though imperfectly, independent of light in emergencies.In fact, we were somewhat apprehensive lest we go astray ourselves in our haste. For we had, of course, decided to keep straight on toward the dead city; since the
                consequences of loss in those unknown foothill honeycombings would be
                unthinkable.The fact that we survived and emerged is sufficient proof that the thing did take a
                wrong gallery whilst we providentially hit on the right one. The penguins alone could not have saved us, but in conjunction with the mist they
                seem to have done so. Only a benign fate kept the curling vapors thick enough at the right moment, for
                they were constantly shifting and threatening to vanish.Indeed, they did lift for a second just before we emerged from the nauseously
                resculptured tunnel into the cave; so that we actually caught one first and only
                half glimpse of the oncoming entity as we cast a final, desperately fearful glance
                backward before dimming the torch and mixing with the penguins in the hope of
                dodging pursuit. If the fate which screened us was benign, that which gave us the half glimpse was
                infinitely the opposite; for to that flash of semivision can be traced a full half
                of the horror which has ever since haunted us.Our exact motive in looking back again was perhaps no more than the immemorial
                instinct of the pursued to gauge the nature and course of its pursuer; or perhaps it
                was an automatic attempt to answer a subconscious question raised by one of our
                senses.In the midst of our flight, with all our faculties centered on the problem of escape,
                we were in no condition to observe and analyze details; yet even so our latent brain
                cells must have wondered at the message brought them by our nostrils. Afterward, we realized what it was--that our retreat from the fetid slime coating on
                those headless obstructions, and the coincident approach of the pursuing entity, had
                not brought us the exchange of stenches which logic called for.In the neighborhood of the prostrate things that new and lately unexplainable fetor
                had been wholly dominant; but by this time it ought to have largely given place to
                the nameless stench associated with those others. This it had not done--for instead, the newer and less bearable smell was now
                virtually undiluted, and growing more and more poisonously insistent each
                second.So we glanced back--simultaneously, it would appear; though no doubt the incipient
                motion of one prompted the imitation of the other. As we did so we flashed both torches full strength at the momentarily thinned mist;
                either from sheer primitive anxiety to see all we could, or in a less primitive but
                equally unconscious effort to dazzle the entity before we dimmed our light and
                dodged among the penguins of the labyrinth center ahead.Unhappy act! Not Orpheus himself, or Lot's wife, paid much more dearly for a
                backward glance.Danforth was totally unstrung, and the first thing I remember of the rest of the
                journey was hearing him light-headedly chant a hysterical formula in which I alone
                of mankind could have found anything but insane irrelevance. It reverberated in falsetto echoes among the squawks of the penguins; reverberated
                through the vaulting ahead, and--thank Heaven--through the now empty vaultings
                behind. He could not have begun it at once--else we would not have been alive and blindly
                racing. I shudder to think of what a shade of difference in his nervous reactions might have
                brought.We had expected, upon looking back, to see a terrible and incredible moving entity if
                the mists were thin enough; but of that entity we had formed a clear idea. What we did see--for the mists were indeed all too malignly thinned--was something
                altogether different, and immeasurably more hideous and detestable. It was the utter, objective embodiment of the fantastic novelist's 'thing that
                should not be'; and its nearest comprehensible analogue is a vast, onrushing subway
                train as one sees it from a station platform--the great black front looming
                colossally out of infinite subterraneous distance, constellated with strangely
                colored lights and filling the prodigious burrow.But we were not on a station platform. We were on the track ahead as the nightmare, plastic column of fetid black
                iridescence oozed tightly onward through its fifteen-foot sinus, gathering unholy
                speed and driving before it a spiral, rethickening cloud of the pallid abyss
                vapor.It was a terrible, indescribable thing, vaster than any subway train--a shapeless
                congeries of protoplasmic bubbles, faintly self-luminous, and with myriads of
                temporary eyes forming and unforming as pustules of greenish light all over the
                tunnel-filling front that bore down upon us, crushing the frantic penguins and
                slithering over the glistening floor that it and its kind had swept so evilly free
                of all litter. XII.Danforth and I have recollections of emerging into the great sculptured hemisphere
                and of threading our back trail through the Cyclopean rooms and corridors of the
                dead city; yet these are purely dream fragments involving no memory of volition,
                details, or physical exertion.There was something vaguely appropriate about our departure from those buried epochs;
                for as we wound our panting way up the sixty-foot cylinder of primal masonry we
                glimpsed beside us a continuous procession of heroic sculptures in the dead race's
                early and undecayed technique--a farewell from the Old Ones, written fifty million
                years ago.Finally, scrambling out at the top, we found ourselves on a great mound of tumbled
                blocks, with the curved walls of higher stonework rising westward, and the brooding
                peaks of the great mountains showing beyond the more crumbled structures toward the
                east.The sky above was a churning and opalescent mass of tenuous ice vapors, and the cold
                clutched at our vitals.In less than a quarter of an hour we had found the steep grade to the foothills--the
                probable ancient terrace--by which we had descended, and could see the dark bulk of
                our great plane amidst the sparse ruins on the rising slope ahead.Halfway uphill toward our goal we paused for a momentary breathing spell, and turned
                to look again at the fantastic tangle of incredible stone shapes below us--once more
                outlined mystically against an unknown west. As we did so we saw that the sky beyond had lost its morning haziness; the restless
                ice vapors having moved up to the zenith, where their mocking outlines seemed on the
                point of settling into some bizarre pattern which they feared to make quite definite
                or conclusive.There now lay revealed on the ultimate white horizon behind the grotesque city a dim,
                elfin line of pinnacled violet whose needle-pointed heights loomed dreamlike against
                the beckoning rose color of the western sky. Up toward this shimmering rim sloped the ancient table-land, the depressed course of
                the bygone river traversing it as an irregular ribbon of shadow.For a second we gasped in admiration of the scene's unearthly cosmic beauty, and then
                vague horror began to creep into our souls. For this far violet line could be nothing else than the terrible mountains of the
                forbidden land--highest of earth's peaks and focus of earth's evil; harborers of
                nameless horrors and Archæan secrets; shunned and prayed to by those who feared to
                carve their meaning; untrodden by any living thing of earth, but visited by the
                sinister lightnings and sending strange beams across the plains in the polar
                night.If the sculptured maps and pictures in that prehuman city had told truly, these
                cryptic violet mountains could not be much less than three hundred miles away; yet
                none the less sharply did their dim elfin essence jut above that remote and snowy
                rim, like the serrated edge of a monstrous alien planet about to rise into
                unaccustomed heavens.Looking at them, I thought nervously of certain sculptured hints of what the great
                bygone river had washed down into the city from their accursed sloping--and wondered
                how much sense and how much folly had lain in the fears of those Old Ones who carved
                them so reticently.I recalled how their northerly end must come near the coast at Queen Mary Land, where
                even at that moment Sir Douglas Mawson's expedition was doubtless working less than
                a thousand miles away; and hoped that no evil fate would give Sir Douglas and his
                men a glimpse of what might lie beyond the protecting coastal range. Such thoughts formed a measure of my overwrought condition at the time--and Danforth
                seemed to be even worse.Yet before we had passed the great star-shaped ruin and reached our plane our fears
                had become transferred to the lesser, but vast enough, range whose re-crossing lay
                ahead of us.From these foothills the black, ruin-crusted slopes reared up starkly and hideously
                against the east, again reminding us of those strange Asian paintings of Nicholas
                Roerich; and when we thought of the damnable honeycombings inside them, and of the
                frightful amorphous entities that might have pushed their fetidly squirming sway
                even to the topmost hollow pinnacles, we could not face without panic the prospect
                of again sailing by those suggestive skyward cave mouths where the wind made sounds
                like an evil musical piping over a wide range.To make matters worse, we saw distinct traces of local mist around several of the
                summits--as poor Lake must have done when he made that early mistake about
                volcanism--and thought shiveringly of that kindred mist from which we had just
                escaped--of that, and of the blasphemous, horror-fostering abyss whence all such
                vapors came.All was well with the plane, and we clumsily hauled on our heavy flying furs. Danforth got the engine started without trouble, and we made a very smooth take-off
                over the nightmare city.At a very high level there must have been great disturbance, since the ice-dust
                clouds of the zenith were doing all sorts of fantastic things; but at twenty-four
                thousand feet, the height we needed for the pass, we found navigation quite
                practicable.As we drew close to the jutting peaks the wind's strange piping again became
                manifest, and I could see Danforth's hands trembling at the controls. Rank amateur though I was, I thought at that moment that I might be a better
                navigator than he in effecting the dangerous crossing between pinnacles; and when I
                made motions to change seats and take over his duties he did not protest.I tried to keep all my skill and self-possession about me, and stared at the sector
                of reddish farther sky betwixt the walls of the pass.But Danforth, released from his piloting and keyed up to a dangerous nervous pitch,
                could not keep quiet. I felt him turning and wriggling about as he looked back at the terrible receding
                city, ahead at the cave-riddled, cube-barnacled peaks, sidewise at the bleak sea of
                snowy, rampart-strown foothills, and upward at the seething, grotesquely clouded
                sky.It was then, just as I was trying to steer safely through the pass, that his mad
                shrieking brought us so close to disaster, by shattering my tight hold on myself and
                causing me to fumble helplessly with the controls for a moment. A second afterward my resolution triumphed and we made the crossing safely----Yet I
                am afraid that Danforth will never be the same again.I have said that Danforth refused to tell me what final horror made him scream out so
                insanely--a horror which, I feel sadly sure, is mainly responsible for his present
                breakdown. We had snatches of shouted conversation above the wind's piping and the engine's
                buzzing as we reached the safe side of the range and swooped slowly down toward the
                camp, but that had mostly to do with the pledges of secrecy we had made as we
                prepared to leave the nightmare city.All that Danforth has ever hinted is that the final horror was a mirage. It was not, he declares, anything connected with the cubes and caves of those
                echoing, vaporous, wormily honeycombed mountains of madness which we crossed; but a
                single fantastic, demonic glimpse, among the churning westward zenith clouds, of
                what lay back of those other violet westward mountains which the Old Ones had
                shunned and feared.The higher sky, as we crossed the range, was surely vaporous and disturbed enough;
                and although I did not see the zenith I can well imagine that its swirls of ice dust
                may have taken strange forms. Imagination, knowing how vividly distant scenes can sometimes be reflected,
                refracted, and magnified by such layers of restless cloud, might easily have
                supplied the rest--and, of course, Danforth did not hint any of these specific
                horrors till after his memory had had a chance to draw on his bygone reading. He could never have seen so much in one instantaneous glance.[Footnote 1: Found among the papers of the late Francis Wayland Thurston, of
                    Boston. _1. The Horror in Clay.The most merciful thing in the world, I think, is the inability of the human mind
                    to correlate all its contents. We live on a placid island of ignorance in the midst of black seas of infinity,
                    and it was not meant that we should voyage far. The sciences, each straining in its own direction, have hitherto harmed us
                    little; but some day the piecing together of dissociated knowledge will open up
                    such terrifying vistas of reality, and of our frightful position therein, that
                    we shall either go mad from the revelation or flee from the deadly light into
                    the peace and safety of a new dark age.Theosophists have guessed at the awesome grandeur of the cosmic cycle wherein our
                    world and human race form transient incidents. They have hinted at strange survivals in terms which would freeze the blood if
                    not masked by a bland optimism. But it is not from them that there came the single glimpse of forbidden eons
                    which chills me when I think of it and maddens me when I dream of it. That glimpse, like all dread glimpses of truth, flashed out from an accidental
                    piecing together of separated things--in this case an old newspaper item and the
                    notes of a dead professor. I hope that no one else will accomplish this piecing out; certainly, if I live,
                    I shall never knowingly supply a link in so hideous a chain. I think that the professor, too, intended to keep silent regarding the part he
                    knew, and that he would have destroyed his notes had not sudden death seized
                    him.My knowledge of the thing began in the winter of 1926-27 with the death of my
                    grand-uncle, George Gammell Angell, Professor Emeritus of Semitic languages in
                    Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island. Professor Angell was widely known as an authority on ancient inscriptions, and
                    had frequently been resorted to by the heads of prominent museums; so that his
                    passing at the age of ninety-two may be recalled by many. Locally, interest was intensified by the obscurity of the cause of death. The professor had been stricken whilst returning from the Newport boat; falling
                    suddenly, as witnesses said, after having been jostled by a nautical-looking
                    negro who had come from one of the queer dark courts on the precipitous hillside
                    which formed a short cut from the waterfront to the deceased's home in Williams
                    Street. Physicians were unable to find any visible disorder, but concluded after
                    perplexed debate that some obscure lesion of the heart, induced by the brisk
                    ascent of so steep a hill by so elderly a man, was responsible for the end. At the time I saw no reason to dissent from this dictum, but latterly I am
                    inclined to wonder--and more than wonder.As my granduncle's heir and executor, for he died a childless widower, I was
                    expected to go over his papers with some thoroughness; and for that purpose
                    moved his entire set of files and boxes to my quarters in Boston. Much of the material which I correlated will be later published by the American
                    Archeological Society, but there was one box which I found exceedingly puzzling,
                    and which I felt much averse from showing to other eyes. It had been locked, and I did not find the key till it occurred to me to examine
                    the personal ring which the professor carried always in his pocket. Then, indeed, I succeeded in opening it, but when I did so seemed only to be
                    confronted by a greater and more closely locked barrier. For what could be the meaning of the queer clay bas-relief and the disjointed
                    jottings, ramblings, and cuttings which I found? Had my uncle, in his latter years, become credulous of the most superficial
                    impostures? I resolved to search out the eccentric sculptor responsible for this apparent
                    disturbance of an old man's peace of mind.The bas-relief was a rough rectangle less than an inch thick and about five by
                    six inches in area; obviously of modern origin. Its designs, however, were far from modern in atmosphere and suggestion; for,
                    although the vagaries of cubism and futurism are many and wild, they do not
                    often reproduce that cryptic regularity which lurks in prehistoric writing. And writing of some kind the bulk of these designs seemed certainly to be;
                    though my memory, despite much familiarity with the papers and collections of my
                    uncle, failed in any way to identify this particular species, or even hint at
                    its remotest affiliations.Above these apparent hieroglyphics was a figure of evidently pictorial intent,
                    though its impressionistic execution forbade a very clear idea of its
                    nature. It seemed to be a sort of monster, or symbol representing a monster, of a form
                    which only a diseased fancy could conceive. If I say that my somewhat extravagant imagination yielded simultaneous pictures
                    of an octopus, a dragon, and a human caricature, I shall not be unfaithful to
                    the spirit of the thing. A pulpy, tentacled head surmounted a grotesque and scaly body with rudimentary
                    wings; but it was the _general outline_ of the whole which made it most
                    shockingly frightful. Behind the figure was a vague suggestion of a Cyclopean architectural
                    background.The writing accompanying this oddity was, aside from a stack of press cuttings,
                    in Professor Angell's most recent hand; and made no pretense to literary
                    style. What seemed to be the main document was headed "_CTHULHU CULT_"
                    in characters painstakingly printed to avoid the erroneous reading of a word so
                    unheard-of. This manuscript was divided into two sections, the first of which was headed
                        "1925--Dream and Dream Work of H. A. Wilcox, 7 Thomas St.,
                        Providence, R. I.," and the second, "Narrative of Inspector
                        John R. Legrasse, 121 Bienville St., New Orleans, La., at 1908 A. A. S.
                        Mtg--Notes on Same, Prof. Webb's Acct." The other manuscript papers were all brief notes, some of them accounts of the
                    queer dreams of different persons, some of them citations from theosophical
                    books and magazines (notably W. Scott-Eliott's _Atlantis and the Lost Lemuria_), and the rest comments on
                    long-surviving secret societies and hidden cults, with references to passages in
                    such mythological and anthropological source-books as Frazer's _Golden Bough_
                    and Miss Murray's _Witch-Cult in Western Europe_. The cuttings largely alluded to outré mental illnesses and outbreaks of group
                    folly or mania in the spring of 1925.The first half of the principal manuscript told a very peculiar tale. It appears that on March 1st, 1925, a thin, dark young man of neurotic and
                    excited aspect had called upon Professor Angell bearing the singular clay
                    bas-relief, which was then exceedingly damp and fresh. His card bore the name of Henry Anthony Wilcox, and my uncle had recognized him
                    as the youngest son of an excellent family slightly known to him, who had
                    latterly been studying sculpture at the Rhode Island School of Design and living
                    alone at the Fleur-de-Lys Building near that institution. Wilcox was a precocious youth of known genius but great eccentricity, and had
                    from childhood excited attention through the strange stories and odd dreams he
                    was in the habit of relating. He called himself "psychically hypersensitive", but the staid
                    folk of the ancient commercial city dismissed him as merely
                        "queer". Never mingling much with his kind, he had dropped gradually from social
                    visibility, and was now known only to a small group of esthetes from other
                    towns. Even the Providence Art Club, anxious to preserve its conservatism, had found
                    him quite hopeless.On the occasion of the visit, ran the professor's manuscript, the sculptor
                    abruptly asked for the benefit of his host's archeological knowledge in
                    identifying the hieroglyphics on the bas-relief. He spoke in a dreamy, stilted manner which suggested pose and alienated
                    sympathy; and my uncle showed some sharpness in replying, for the conspicuous
                    freshness of the tablet implied kinship with anything but archeology. Young Wilcox's rejoinder, which impressed my uncle enough to make him recall and
                    record it verbatim, was of a fantastically poetic cast which must have typified
                    his whole conversation, and which I have since found highly characteristic of
                    him. He said, "It is new, indeed, for I made it last night in a dream of
                        strange cities; and dreams are older than brooding Tyre, or the
                        contemplative Sphinx, or garden-girdled Babylon."It was then that he began that rambling tale which suddenly played upon a
                    sleeping memory and won the fevered interest of my uncle. There had been a slight earthquake tremor the night before, the most
                    considerable felt in New England for some years; and Wilcox's imagination had
                    been keenly affected. Upon retiring, he had had an unprecedented dream of great Cyclopean cities of
                    Titan blocks and sky-flung monoliths, all dripping with green ooze and sinister
                    with latent horror. Hieroglyphics had covered the walls and pillars, and from some undetermined
                    point below had come a voice that was not a voice; a chaotic sensation which
                    only fancy could transmute into sound, but which he attempted to render by the
                    almost unpronounceable jumble of letters, "_Cthulhu fhtagn_".This verbal jumble was the key to the recollection which excited and disturbed
                    Professor Angell. He questioned the sculptor with scientific minuteness; and studied with almost
                    frantic intensity the bas-relief on which the youth had found himself working,
                    chilled and clad only in his nightclothes, when waking had stolen bewilderingly
                    over him. My uncle blamed his old age, Wilcox afterward said, for his slowness in
                    recognizing both hieroglyphics and pictorial design. Many of his questions seemed highly out of place to his visitor, especially
                    those which tried to connect the latter with strange cults or societies; and
                    Wilcox could not understand the repeated promises of silence which he was
                    offered in exchange for an admission of membership in some widespread mystical
                    or paganly religious body. When Professor Angell became convinced that the sculptor was indeed ignorant of
                    any cult or system of cryptic lore, he besieged his visitor with demands for
                    future reports of dreams. This bore regular fruit, for after the first interview the manuscript records
                    daily calls of the young man, during which he related startling fragments of
                    nocturnal imagery whose burden was always some terrible Cyclopean vista of dark
                    and dripping stone, with a subterrene voice or intelligence shouting
                    monotonously in enigmatical sense-impacts uninscribable save as gibberish. The two sounds most frequently repeated are those rendered by the letters
                        "_Cthulhu_" and "_R'lyeh_".On March 23rd, the manuscript continued, Wilcox failed to appear; and inquiries
                    at his quarters revealed that he had been stricken with an obscure sort of fever
                    and taken to the home of his family in Waterman Street. He had cried out in the night, arousing several other artists in the building,
                    and had manifested since then only alternations of unconsciousness and
                    delirium. My uncle at once telephoned the family, and from that time forward kept close
                    watch of the case; calling often at the Thayer Street office of Dr. Tobey, whom he learned to be in charge. The youth's febrile mind, apparently, was dwelling on strange things; and the
                    doctor shuddered now and then as he spoke of them. They included not only a repetition of what he had formerly dreamed, but touched
                    wildly on a gigantic thing "miles high" which walked or lumbered
                    about. He at no time fully described this object, but occasional frantic words, as
                    repeated by Dr. Tobey, convinced the professor that it must be identical with the nameless
                    monstrosity he had sought to depict in his dream-sculpture. Reference to this object, the doctor added, was invariably a prelude to the
                    young man's subsidence into lethargy. His temperature, oddly enough, was not greatly above normal; but the whole
                    condition was otherwise such as to suggest true fever rather than mental
                    disorder.On April 2nd at about 3 p. m. every trace of Wilcox's malady suddenly ceased. He sat upright in bed, astonished to find himself at home and completely
                    ignorant of what had happened in dream or reality since the night of March
                    22nd. Pronounced well by his physician, he returned to his quarters in three days; but
                    to Professor Angell he was of no further assistance. All traces of strange dreaming had vanished with his recovery, and my uncle kept
                    no record of his night-thoughts after a week of pointless and irrelevant
                    accounts of thoroughly usual visions.Here the first part of the manuscript ended, but references to certain of the
                    scattered notes gave me much material for thought--so much, in fact, that only
                    the ingrained skepticism then forming my philosophy can account for my continued
                    distrust of the artist. The notes in question were those descriptive of the dreams of various persons
                    covering the same period as that in which young Wilcox had had his strange
                    visitations. My uncle, it seems, had quickly instituted a prodigiously far-flung body of
                    inquiries amongst nearly all the friends whom he could question without
                    impertinence, asking for nightly reports of their dreams, and the dates of any
                    notable visions for some time past. The reception of his request seems to have been varied; but he must, at the very
                    least, have received more responses than any ordinary man could have handled
                    without a secretary. This original correspondence was not preserved, but his notes formed a thorough
                    and really significant digest. Average people in society and business--New England's traditional "salt
                        of the earth"--gave an almost completely negative result, though
                    scattered cases of uneasy but formless nocturnal impressions appear here and
                    there, always between March 23rd and April 2nd--the period of young Wilcox's
                    delirium. Scientific men were little more affected, though four cases of vague description
                    suggest fugitive glimpses of strange landscapes, and in one case there is
                    mentioned a dread of something abnormal.It was from the artists and poets that the pertinent answers came, and I know
                    that panic would have broken loose had they been able to compare notes. As it was, lacking their original letters, I half suspected the compiler of
                    having asked leading questions, or of having edited the correspondence in
                    corroboration of what he had latently resolved to see. That is why I continued to feel that Wilcox, somehow cognizant of the old data
                    which my uncle had possessed, had been imposing on the veteran scientist. These responses from esthetes told a disturbing tale. From February 28th to April 2nd a large proportion of them had dreamed very
                    bizarre things, the intensity of the dreams being immeasurably the stronger
                    during the period of the sculptor's delirium. Over a fourth of those who reported anything, reported scenes and half-sounds
                    not unlike those which Wilcox had described; and some of the dreamers confessed
                    acute fear of the gigantic nameless thing visible toward the last. One case, which the note describes with emphasis, was very sad. The subject, a widely known architect with leanings toward theosophy and
                    occultism, went violently insane on the date of young Wilcox's seizure, and
                    expired several months later after incessant screamings to be saved from some
                    escaped denizen of hell. Had my uncle referred to these cases by name instead of merely by number, I
                    should have attempted some corroboration and personal investigation; but as it
                    was, I succeeded in tracing down only a few. All of these, however, bore out the notes in full. I have often wondered if all the objects of the professor's questioning felt as
                    puzzled as did this fraction. It is well that no explanation shall ever reach them.The press cuttings, as I have intimated, touched on cases of panic, mania, and
                    eccentricity during the given period. Professor Angell must have employed a cutting bureau, for the number of extracts
                    was tremendous, and the sources scattered throughout the globe. Here was a nocturnal suicide in London, where a lone sleeper had leaped from a
                    window after a shocking cry. Here likewise a rambling letter to the editor of a paper in South America, where
                    a fanatic deduces a dire future from visions he has seen. A dispatch from California describes a theosophist colony as donning white robes
                    en masse for some "glorious fulfilment" which never arrives,
                    whilst items from India speak guardedly of serious native unrest toward the end
                    of March. Voodoo orgies multiply in Haiti, and African outposts report ominous
                    mutterings. American officers in the Philippines find certain tribes bothersome about this
                    time, and New York policemen are mobbed by hysterical Levantines on the night of
                    March 22-23. The west of Ireland, too, is full of wild rumor and legendry, and a fantastic
                    painter named Ardois-Bonnot hangs a blasphemous _Dream Landscape_ in the Paris
                    spring salon of 1926. And so numerous are the recorded troubles in insane asylums that only a miracle
                    can have stopped the medical fraternity from noting strange parallelisms and
                    drawing mystified conclusions. A weird bunch of cuttings, all told; and I can at this date scarcely envisage
                    the callous rationalism with which I set them aside. But I was then convinced that young Wilcox had known of the older matters
                    mentioned by the professor. _2. The Tale of Inspector Legrasse.The older matters which had made the sculptor's dream and bas-relief so
                    significant to my uncle formed the subject of the second half of his long
                    manuscript. Once before, it appears, Professor Angell had seen the hellish outlines of the
                    nameless monstrosity, puzzled over the unknown hieroglyphics, and heard the
                    ominous syllables which can be rendered only as "_Cthulhu_"; and
                    all this in so stirring and horrible a connection that it is small wonder he
                    pursued young Wilcox with queries and demands for data.This earlier experience had come in 1908, seventeen years before, when the
                    American Archeological Society held its annual meeting in St. Louis. Professor Angell, as befitted one of his authority and attainments, had had a
                    prominent part in all the deliberations; and was one of the first to be
                    approached by the several outsiders who took advantage of the convocation to
                    offer questions for correct answering and problems for expert solution.The chief of these outsiders, and in a short time the focus of interest for the
                    entire meeting, was a commonplace-looking middle-aged man who had traveled all
                    the way from New Orleans for certain special information unobtainable from any
                    local source. His name was John Raymond Legrasse, and he was by profession an inspector of
                    police. With him he bore the subject of his visit, a grotesque, repulsive, and
                    apparently very ancient stone statuette whose origin he was at a loss to
                    determine.It must not be fancied that Inspector Legrasse had the least interest in
                    archeology. On the contrary, his wish for enlightenment was prompted by purely professional
                    considerations. The statuette, idol, fetish, or whatever it was, had been captured some months
                    before in the wooded swamps south of New Orleans during a raid on a supposed
                    voodoo meeting; and so singular and hideous were the rites connected with it,
                    that the police could not but realize that they had stumbled on a dark cult
                    totally unknown to them, and infinitely more diabolic than even the blackest of
                    the African voodoo circles. Of its origin, apart from the erratic and unbelievable tales extorted from the
                    captured members, absolutely nothing was to be discovered; hence the anxiety of
                    the police for any antiquarian lore which might help them to place the frightful
                    symbol, and through it track down the cult to its fountain-head.Inspector Legrasse was scarcely prepared for the sensation which his offering
                    created. One sight of the thing had been enough to throw the assembled men of science
                    into a state of tense excitement, and they lost no time in crowding around him
                    to gaze at the diminutive figure whose utter strangeness and air of genuinely
                    abysmal antiquity hinted so potently at unopened and archaic vistas. No recognized school of sculpture had animated this terrible object, yet
                    centuries and even thousands of years seemed recorded in its dim and greenish
                    surface of unplaceable stone.The figure, which was finally passed slowly from man to man for close and careful
                    study, was between seven and eight inches in height, and of exquisitely artistic
                    workmanship. It represented a monster of vaguely anthropoid outline, but with an octopuslike
                    head whose face was a mass of feelers, a scaly, rubbery-looking body, prodigious
                    claws on hind and fore feet, and long, narrow wings behind. This thing, which seemed instinct with a fearsome and unnatural malignancy, was
                    of a somewhat bloated corpulence, and squatted evilly on a rectangular block or
                    pedestal covered with undecipherable characters. The tips of the wings touched the back edge of the block, the seat occupied the
                    center, whilst the long, curved claws of the doubled-up, crouching hind legs
                    gripped the front edge and extended a quarter of the way down toward the bottom
                    of the pedestal. The cephalopod head was bent forward, so that the ends of the facial feelers
                    brushed the backs of huge forepaws which clasped the croucher's elevated
                    knees. The aspect of the whole was abnormally lifelike, and the more subtly fearful
                    because its source was so totally unknown. Its vast, awesome, and incalculable age was unmistakable; yet not one link did
                    it show with any known type of art belonging to civilization's youth--or indeed
                    to any other time.Totally separate and apart, its very material was a mystery; for the soapy,
                    greenish-black stone with its golden or iridescent flecks and striations
                    resembled nothing familiar to geology or mineralogy. The characters along the base were equally baffling; and no member present,
                    despite a representation of half the world's expert learning in this field,
                    could form the least notion of even their remotest linguistic kinship. They, like the subject and material, belonged to something horribly remote and
                    distinct from mankind as we know it; something frightfully suggestive of old and
                    unhallowed cycles of life in which our world and our conceptions have no
                    part.And yet, as the members severally shook their heads and confessed defeat at the
                    inspector's problem, there was one man in that gathering who suspected a touch
                    of bizarre familiarity in the monstrous shape and writing, and who presently
                    told with some diffidence of the odd trifle he knew. This person was the late William Channing Webb, professor of anthropology in
                    Princeton University, and an explorer of no slight note.Professor Webb had been engaged, forty-eight years before, in a tour of Greenland
                    and Iceland in search of some Runic inscriptions which he failed to unearth; and
                    whilst high up on the West Greenland coast had encountered a singular tribe or
                    cult of degenerate Eskimos whose religion, a curious form of devil-worship,
                    chilled him with its deliberate bloodthirstiness and repulsiveness. It was a faith of which other Eskimos knew little, and which they mentioned only
                    with shudders, saying that it had come down from horribly ancient eons before
                    ever the world was made. Besides nameless rites and human sacrifices there were certain queer hereditary
                    rituals addressed to a supreme elder devil or _tornasuk_; and of this Professor
                    Webb had taken a careful phonetic copy from an aged _angekok_ or wizard-priest,
                    expressing the sounds in Roman letters as best he knew how. But just now of prime significance was the fetish which this cult had cherished,
                    and around which they danced when the aurora leaped high over the ice
                    cliffs. It was, the professor stated, a very crude bas-relief of stone, comprising a
                    hideous picture and some cryptic writing. And as far as he could tell, it was a rough parallel in all essential features
                    of the bestial thing now lying before the meeting.These data, received with suspense and astonishment by the assembled members,
                    proved doubly exciting to Inspector Legrasse; and he began at once to ply his
                    informant with questions. Having noted and copied an oral ritual among the swamp cult-worshipers his men
                    had arrested, he besought the professor to remember as best he might the
                    syllables taken down amongst the diabolist Eskimos. There then followed an exhaustive comparison of details, and a moment of really
                    awed silence when both detective and scientist agreed on the virtual identity of
                    the phrase common to two hellish rituals so many worlds of distance apart. What, in substance, both the Eskimo wizards and the Louisiana swamp-priests had
                    chanted to their kindred idols was something very like this--the word-divisions
                    being guessed at from traditional breaks in the phrase as chanted aloud: SLegrasse had one point in advance of Professor Webb, for several among his
                    mongrel prisoners had repeated to him what older celebrants had told them the
                    words meant. This text, as given, ran something like this: And now, in response to a general urgent demand, Inspector Legrasse related as
                    fully as possible his experience with the swamp worshipers; telling a story to
                    which I could see my uncle attached profound significance. It savored of the wildest dreams of myth-maker and theosophist, and disclosed an
                    astonishing degree of cosmic imagination among such half-castes and pariahs as
                    might be least expected to possess it.On November 1st, 1907, there had come to New Orleans police a frantic summons
                    from the swamp and lagoon country to the south. The squatters there, mostly primitive but good-natured descendants of Lafitte's
                    men, were in the grip of stark terror from an unknown thing which had stolen
                    upon them in the night. It was voodoo, apparently, but voodoo of a more terrible sort than they had ever
                    known; and some of their women and children had disappeared since the malevolent
                    tom-tom had begun its incessant beating far within the black haunted woods where
                    no dweller ventured. There were insane shouts and harrowing screams, soul-chilling chants and dancing
                    devil-flames; and, the frightened messenger added, the people could stand it no
                    more.So a body of twenty police, filling two carriages and an automobile, had set out
                    in the late afternoon with the shivering squatter as a guide. At the end of the passable road they alighted, and for miles splashed on in
                    silence through the terrible cypress woods where day never came. Ugly roots and malignant hanging nooses of Spanish moss beset them, and now and
                    then a pile of dank stones or fragments of a rotting wall intensified by its
                    hint of morbid habitation a depression which every malformed tree and every
                    fungous islet combined to create. At length the squatter settlement, a miserable huddle of huts, hove in sight;
                    and hysterical dwellers ran out to cluster around the group of bobbing
                    lanterns. The muffled beat of tom-toms was now faintly audible far, far ahead; and a
                    curdling shriek came at infrequent intervals when the wind shifted. A reddish glare, too, seemed to filter through the pale undergrowth beyond
                    endless avenues of forest night. Reluctant even to be left alone again, each one of the cowed squatters refused
                    point-blank to advance another inch toward the scene of unholy worship, so
                    Inspector Legrasse and his nineteen colleagues plunged on unguided into black
                    arcades of horror that none of them had ever trod before.The region now entered by the police was one of traditionally evil repute,
                    substantially unknown and untraversed by white men. There were legends of a hidden lake unglimpsed by mortal sight, in which dwelt a
                    huge, formless white polypous thing with luminous eyes; and squatters whispered
                    that bat-winged devils flew up out of caverns in inner earth to worship it at
                    midnight. They said it had been there before D'Iberville, before La Salle, before the
                    Indians, and before even the wholesome beasts and birds of the woods. It was nightmare itself, and to see it was to die. But it made men dream, and so they knew enough to keep away. The present voodoo orgy was, indeed, on the merest fringe of this abhorred area,
                    but that location was bad enough; hence perhaps the very place of the worship
                    had terrified the squatters more than the shocking sounds and incidents.Only poetry or madness could do justice to the noises heard by Legrasse's men as
                    they plowed on through the black morass toward the red glare and the muffled
                    tom-toms. There are vocal qualities peculiar to men, and vocal qualities peculiar to
                    beasts; and it is terrible to hear the one when the source should yield the
                    other. Animal fury and orgiastic license here whipped themselves to demoniac heights by
                    howls and squawking ecstasies that tore and reverberated through those nighted
                    woods like pestilential tempests from the gulfs of hell. Now and then the less organized ululations would cease, and from what seemed a
                    well-drilled chorus of hoarse voices would rise in singsong chant that hideous
                    phrase or ritual: Then the men, having reached a spot where the trees were thinner, came suddenly
                    in sight of the spectacle itself. Four of them reeled, one fainted, and two were shaken into a frantic cry which
                    the mad cacophony of the orgy fortunately deadened. Legrasse dashed swamp water on the face of the fainting man, and all stood
                    trembling and nearly hypnotized with horror.In a natural glade of the swamp stood a grassy island of perhaps an acre's
                    extent, clear of trees and tolerably dry. On this now leaped and twisted a more indescribable horde of human abnormality
                    than any but a Sime or an Angarola could paint. Void of clothing, this hybrid spawn were braying, bellowing and writhing about a
                    monstrous ring-shaped bonfire; in the center of which, revealed by occasional
                    rifts in the curtain of flame, stood a great granite monolith some eight feet in
                    height; on top of which, incongruous in its diminutiveness, rested the noxious
                    carven statuette. From a wide circle of ten scaffolds set up at regular intervals with the
                    flame-girt monolith as a center hung, head downward, the oddly marred bodies of
                    the helpless squatters who had disappeared. It was inside this circle that the ring of worshipers jumped and roared, the
                    general direction of the mass motion being from left to right in endless
                    bacchanale between the ring of bodies and the ring of fire.It may have been only imagination and it may have been only echoes which induced
                    one of the men, an excitable Spaniard, to fancy he heard antiphonal responses to
                    the ritual from some far and unillumined spot deeper within the wood of ancient
                    legendry and horror. This man, Joseph D. Galvez, I later met and questioned; and he proved distractingly imaginative. He indeed went so far as to hint of the faint beating of great wings, and of a
                    glimpse of shining eyes and a mountainous white bulk beyond the remotest
                    trees--but I suppose he had been hearing too much native superstition.Actually, the horrified pause of the men was of comparatively brief duration. Duty came first; and although there must have been nearly a hundred mongrel
                    celebrants in the throng, the police relied on their firearms and plunged
                    determinedly into the nauseous rout. For five minutes the resultant din and chaos were beyond description. Wild blows were struck, shots were fired, and escapes were made; but in the end
                    Legrasse was able to count some forty-seven sullen prisoners, whom he forced to
                    dress in haste and fall into line between two rows of policemen. Five of the worshipers lay dead, and two severely wounded ones were carried away
                    on improvised stretchers by their fellow-prisoners. The image on the monolith, of course, was carefully removed and carried back by
                    Legrasse.Examined at headquarters after a trip of intense strain and weariness, the
                    prisoners all proved to be men of a very low, mixed-blooded, and mentally
                    aberrant type. Most were seamen, and a sprinkling of negroes and mulattoes, largely West
                    Indians or Brava Portuguese from the Cape Verde Islands, gave a coloring of
                    voodooism to the heterogeneous cult. But before many questions were asked, it became manifest that something far
                    deeper and older than negro fetishism was involved. Degraded and ignorant as they were, the creatures held with surprizing
                    consistency to the central idea of their loathsome faith.They worshiped, so they said, the Great Old Ones who lived ages before there were
                    any men, and who came to the young world out of the sky. Those Old Ones were gone now, inside the earth and under the sea; but their dead
                    bodies had told their secrets in dreams to the first man, who formed a cult
                    which had never died. This was that cult, and the prisoners said it had always existed and always
                    would exist, hidden in distant wastes and dark places all over the world until
                    the time when the great priest Cthulhu, from his dark house in the mighty city
                    of R'lyeh under the waters, should rise and bring the earth again beneath his
                    sway. Some day he would call, when the stars were ready, and the secret cult would
                    always be waiting to liberate him.Meanwhile no more must be told. There was a secret which even torture
                    could not extract. Mankind was not absolutely alone among the conscious
                    things of earth, for shapes came out of the dark to visit the faithful
                    few. But these were not the Great Old Ones. No man had ever seen
                    the Old Ones. The carven idol was great Cthulhu, but none might say
                    whether or not the others were precisely like him. No one could read the
                    old writing now, but things were told by word of mouth. The chanted
                    ritual was not the secret--that was never spoken aloud, only whispered.Only two of the prisoners were found sane enough to be hanged, and the rest were
                    committed to various institutions. All denied a part in the ritual murders, and averred that the killing had been
                    done by Black-winged Ones which had come to them from their immemorial
                    meeting-place in the haunted wood. But of those mysterious allies no coherent account could ever be gained. What the police did extract came mainly from an immensely aged mestizo named
                    Castro, who claimed to have sailed to strange ports and talked with undying
                    leaders of the cult in the mountains of China.Old Castro remembered bits of hideous legend that paled the speculations of
                    theosophists and made man and the world seem recent and transient indeed. There had been eons when other Things ruled on the earth, and They had had great
                    cities. Remains of Them, he said the deathless Chinamen had told him, were still to be
                    found as Cyclopean stones on islands in the Pacific. They all died vast epochs of time before man came, but there were arts which
                    could revive Them when the stars had come round again to the right positions in
                    the cycle of eternity. They had, indeed, come themselves from the stars, and brought Their images with
                    Them.These Great Old Ones, Castro continued, were not composed altogether of flesh and
                    blood. They had shape--for did not this star-fashioned image prove it?--but that shape was not made of matter. When the stars were right, They could plunge from world to world through the
                    sky; but when the stars were wrong, They could not live. But although They no longer lived, They would never really die. They all lay in stone houses in Their great city of R'lyeh, preserved by the
                    spells of mighty Cthulhu for a glorious resurrection when the stars and the
                    earth might once more be ready for Them. But at that time some force from outside must serve to liberate Their
                    bodies. The spells that preserved Them intact likewise prevented Them from making an
                    initial move, and They could only lie awake in the dark and think whilst
                    uncounted millions of years rolled by. They knew all that was occurring in the universe, for Their mode of speech was
                    transmitted thought. Even now They talked in Their tombs. When, after infinities of chaos, the first men came, the Great Old Ones spoke to
                    the sensitive among them by molding their dreams; for only thus could Their
                    language reach the fleshly minds of mammals.Then, whispered Castro, those first men formed the cult around small idols which
                    the Great Ones showed them; idols brought in dim eras from dark stars. That cult would never die till the stars came right again, and the secret
                    priests would take great Cthulhu from His tomb to revive His subjects and resume
                    His rule of earth. The time would be easy to know, for then mankind would have become as the Great
                    Old Ones; free and wild and beyond good and evil, with laws and morals thrown
                    aside and all men shouting and killing and reveling in joy. Then the liberated Old Ones would teach them new ways to shout and kill and
                    revel and enjoy themselves, and all the earth would flame with a holocaust of
                    ecstasy and freedom. Meanwhile the cult, by appropriate rites, must keep alive the memory of those
                    ancient ways and shadow forth the prophecy of their return.In the elder time chosen men had talked with the entombed Old Ones in dreams,
                    but then something had happened. The great stone city R'lyeh, with its
                    monoliths and sepulchers, had sunk beneath the waves; and the deep waters, full
                    of the one primal mystery through which not even thought can pass, had cut off
                    the spectral intercourse. But memory never died, and high priests said
                    that the city would rise again when the stars were right. Then came out
                    of the earth the black spirits of earth, moldy and shadowy, and full of dim
                    rumors picked up in caverns beneath forgotten sea-bottoms. But of them
                    old Castro dared not speak much. He cut himself off hurriedly, and no
                    amount of persuasion or subtlety could elicit more in this direction. The
                    _size_ of the Old Ones, too, he curiously declined to mention. Of the
                    cult, he said that he thought the center lay amid the pathless deserts of
                    Arabia, where Irem, the City of Pillars, dreams hidden and untouched. It
                    was not allied to the European witch-cult, and was virtually unknown beyond its
                    members. No book had ever really hinted of it, though the deathless
                    Chinamen said that there were double meanings in the _Necronomicon_ of the mad
                    Arab Abdul Alhazred which the initiated might read as they chose, especially the
                    much-discussed couplet: Legrasse, deeply impressed and not a little bewildered, had inquired in vain
                    concerning the historic affiliations of the cult. Castro, apparently, had told the truth when he said that it was wholly
                    secret. The authorities at Tulane University could shed no light upon either cult or
                    image, and now the detective had come to the highest authorities in the country
                    and met with no more than the Greenland tale of Professor Webb.The feverish interest aroused at the meeting by Legrasse's tale, corroborated as
                    it was by the statuette, is echoed in the subsequent correspondence of those who
                    attended, although scant mention occurs in the formal publication of the
                    society. Caution is the first care of those accustomed to face occasional charlatanry and
                    imposture. Legrasse for some time lent the image to Professor Webb, but at the latter's
                    death it was returned to him and remains in his possession, where I viewed it
                    not long ago. It is truly a terrible thing, and unmistakably akin to the dream-sculpture of
                    young Wilcox.That my uncle was excited by the tale of the sculptor I did not wonder, for what
                    thoughts must arise upon hearing, after a knowledge of what Legrasse had learned
                    of the cult, of a sensitive young man who had _dreamed_ not only the figure and
                    exact hieroglyphics of the swamp-found image and the Greenland devil tablet, but
                    had come _in his dreams_ upon at least three of the precise words of the formula
                    uttered alike by Eskimo diabolists and mongrel Louisianans? Professor Angell's instant start on an investigation of the utmost thoroughness
                    was eminently natural; though privately I suspected young Wilcox of having heard
                    of the cult in some indirect way, and of having invented a series of dreams to
                    heighten and continue the mystery at my uncle's expense. The dream-narratives and cuttings collected by the professor were, of course,
                    strong corroboration; but the rationalism of my mind and the extravagance of the
                    whole subject led me to adopt what I thought the most sensible conclusions. So, after thoroughly studying the manuscript again and correlating the
                    theosophical and anthropological notes with the cult narrative of Legrasse, I
                    made a trip to Providence to see the sculptor and give him the rebuke I thought
                    proper for so boldly imposing upon a learned and aged man.Wilcox still lived alone in the Fleur-de-Lys Building in Thomas Street, a hideous
                    Victorian imitation of Seventeenth Century Breton architecture which flaunts its
                    stuccoed front amidst the lovely Colonial houses on the ancient hill, and under
                    the very shadow of the finest Georgian steeple in America. I found him at work in his rooms, and at once conceded from the specimens
                    scattered about that his genius is indeed profound and authentic. He will, I believe, be heard from sometime as one of the great decadents; for he
                    has crystallized in clay and will one day mirror in marble those nightmares and
                    fantasies which Arthur Machen evokes in prose, and Clark Ashton Smith makes
                    visible in verse and in painting.Dark, frail, and somewhat unkempt in aspect, he turned languidly at my knock and
                    asked me my business without rising. When I told him who I was, he displayed some interest; for my uncle had excited
                    his curiosity in probing his strange dreams, yet had never explained the reason
                    for the study. I did not enlarge his knowledge in this regard, but sought with some subtlety to
                    draw him out.In a short time I became convinced of his absolute sincerity, for he spoke of the
                    dreams in a manner none could mistake. They and their subconscious residuum had influenced his art profoundly, and he
                    showed me a morbid statue whose contours almost made me shake with the potency
                    of its black suggestion. He could not recall having seen the original of this thing except in his own
                    dream bas-relief, but the outlines had formed themselves insensibly under his
                    hands. It was, no doubt, the giant shape he had raved of in delirium. That he really knew nothing of the hidden cult, save from what my uncle's
                    relentless catechism had let fall, he soon made clear; and again I strove to
                    think of some way in which he could possibly have received the weird
                    impressions.He talked of his dreams in a strangely poetic fashion; making me see with
                    terrible vividness the damp Cyclopean city of slimy green stone--whose
                    _geometry_, he oddly said, was _all wrong_--and hear with frightened expectancy
                    the ceaseless, half-mental calling from underground: "_Cthulhu
                        fhtagn_,
                    "_Cthulhu fhtagn_."These words had formed part of that dread ritual which told of dead Cthulhu's
                    dream-vigil in his stone vault at R'lyeh, and I felt deeply moved despite my
                    rational beliefs. Wilcox, I was sure, had heard of the cult in some casual way, and had soon
                    forgotten it amidst the mass of his equally weird reading and imagining. Later, by virtue of its sheer impressiveness, it had found subconscious
                    expression in dreams, in the bas-relief, and in the terrible statue I now
                    beheld; so that his imposture upon my uncle had been a very innocent one. The youth was of a type, at once slightly affected and slightly ill-mannered,
                    which I could never like; but I was willing enough now to admit both his genius
                    and his honesty. I took leave of him amicably, and wish him all the success his talent
                    promises.The matter of the cult still remained to fascinate me, and at times I had visions
                    of personal fame from researches into its origin and connections. I visited New Orleans, talked with Legrasse and others of that old-time
                    raiding-party, saw the frightful image, and even questioned such of the mongrel
                    prisoners as still survived. Old Castro, unfortunately, had been dead for some years. What I now heard so graphically at first hand, though it was really no more than
                    a detailed confirmation of what my uncle had written, excited me afresh; for I
                    felt sure that I was on the track of a very real, very secret, and very ancient
                    religion whose discovery would make me an anthropologist of note. My attitude was still one of absolute materialism, _as I wish it still were_,
                    and I discounted with almost inexplicable perversity the coincidence of the
                    dream notes and odd cuttings collected by Professor Angell.One thing which I began to suspect, and which I now fear I _know_, is that my
                    uncle's death was far from natural. He fell on a narrow hill street leading up from an ancient waterfront swarming
                    with foreign mongrels, after a careless push from a negro sailor. I did not forget the mixed blood and marine pursuits of the cult-members in
                    Louisiana, and would not be surprized to learn of secret methods and poison
                    needles as ruthless and as anciently known as the cryptic rites and beliefs. Legrasse and his men, it is true, have been let alone; but in Norway a certain
                    seaman who saw things is dead. Might not the deeper inquiries of my uncle after encountering the sculptor's
                    data have come to sinister ears? I think Professor Angell died because he knew too much, or because he was likely
                    to learn too much. Whether I shall go as he did remains to be seen, for I have learned much
                    now. _3. The Madness from the Sea.If heaven ever wishes to grant me a boon, it will be a total effacing of the
                    results of a mere chance which fixed my eye on a certain stray piece of
                    shelf-paper. It was nothing on which I would naturally have stumbled in the course of my
                    daily round, for it was an old number of an Australian journal, _Sydney
                    Bulletin_ for April 18, 1925. It had escaped even the cutting bureau which had at the time of its issuance
                    been avidly collecting material for my uncle's research.I had largely given over my inquiries into what Professor Angell called the
                        "Cthulhu Cult," and was visiting a learned friend of
                    Paterson, New Jersey, the curator of a local museum and a mineralogist of
                    note. Examining one day the reserve specimens roughly set on the storage
                    shelves in a rear room of the museum, my eye was caught by an odd picture in one
                    of the old papers spread beneath the stones. It was the _Sydney Bulletin_
                    I have mentioned, for my friend has wide affiliations in all conceivable foreign
                    parts; and the picture was a half-tone cut of a hideous stone image almost
                    identical with that which Legrasse had found in the swamp.Eagerly clearing the sheet of its precious contents, I scanned the item in
                    detail; and was disappointed to find it of only moderate length. What it suggested, however, was of portentous significance to my flagging quest;
                    and I carefully tore it out for immediate action. It read as follows:
                 _Vigilant_ Arrives With Helpless Armed New Zealand Yacht in Tow. One Survivor and Dead Man Found Aboard. Tale of Desperate Battle and Deaths at Sea. Rescued Seaman Refuses Particulars of Strange Experience. Odd Idol Found in His Possession. Inquiry to Follow. The Morrison Co.'s freighter _Vigilant_, bound from Valparaiso, arrived this morning at its wharf
                    in Darling Harbour, having in tow the battled and disabled but heavily armed
                    steam yacht _Alert_ of Dunedin, N. Z., which was sighted April 12th in S. Latitude 34° 21', W. Longitude 152° 17', with one living and one dead man aboard. The _Vigilant_ left Valparaiso March 25th, and on April 2d was driven
                    considerably south of her course by exceptionally heavy storms and monster
                    waves. On April 12th the derelict was sighted; and though apparently deserted, was
                    found upon boarding to contain one survivor in a half-delirious condition and
                    one man who had evidently been dead for more than a week. The living man was clutching a horrible stone idol of unknown origin, about a
                    foot in height, regarding whose nature authorities at Sydney University, the
                    Royal Society, and the Museum in College Street all profess complete bafflement,
                    and which the survivor says he found in the cabin of the yacht, in a small
                    carved shrine of common pattern. This man, after recovering his senses, told an exceedingly strange story of
                    piracy and slaughter. He is Gustaf Johansen, a Norwegian of some intelligence, and had been second
                    mate of the two-masted schooner _Emma_ of Auckland, which sailed for Callao
                    February 20th, with a complement of eleven men. The _Emma_, he says, was delayed and thrown widely south of her course by the
                    great storm of March 1st, and on March 22d, in S. Latitude 49° 51´, W. Longitude 128° 34´, encountered the _Alert_, manned by a queer and evil-looking
                    crew of Kanakas and half-castes. Being ordered peremptorily to turn back, Capt. Collins refused; whereupon the strange crew began to fire savagely and without
                    warning upon the schooner with a peculiarly heavy battery of brass cannon
                    forming part of the yacht's equipment. The _Emma's_ men showed fight, says the survivor, and though the schooner began
                    to sink from shots beneath the waterline they managed to heave alongside their
                    enemy and board her, grappling with the savage crew on the yacht's deck, and
                    being forced to kill them all, the number being slightly superior, because of
                    their particularly abhorrent and desperate though rather clumsy mode of
                    fighting. Three of the _Emma's_ men, including Capt. Collins and First Mate Green, were killed; and the remaining eight under Second
                    Mate Johansen proceeded to navigate the captured yacht, going ahead in their
                    original direction to see if any reason for their ordering back had existed. The next day, it appears, they raised and landed on a small island, although
                    none is known to exist in that part of the ocean; and six of the men somehow
                    died ashore, though Johansen is queerly reticent about this part of his story
                    and speaks only of their falling into a rock chasm. Later, it seems, he and one companion boarded the yacht and tried to manage her,
                    but were beaten about by the storm of April 2nd. From that time till his rescue on the 12th, the man remembers little, and he
                    does not even recall when William Briden, his companion, died. Briden's death reveals no apparent cause, and was probably due to excitement or
                    exposure. Cable advices from Dunedin report that the _Alert_ was well known there as an
                    island trader, and bore an evil reputation along the waterfront. It was owned by a curious group of half-castes whose frequent meetings and night
                    trips to the woods attracted no little curiosity; and it had set sail in great
                    haste just after the storm and earth tremors of March 1st. Our Auckland correspondent gives the _Emma_ and her crew an excellent
                    reputation, and Johansen is described as a sober and worthy man. The admiralty will institute an inquiry on the whole matter beginning tomorrow,
                    at which every effort will be made to induce Johansen to speak more freely than
                    he has done hitherto.This was all, together with the picture of the hellish image; but what a train of
                    ideas it started in my mind! Here were new treasuries of data on the Cthulhu Cult, and evidence that it had
                    strange interests at sea as well as on land. What motive prompted the hybrid crew to order back the _Emma_ as they sailed
                    about with their hideous idol? What was the unknown island on which six of the _Emma's_ crew had died, and
                    about which the mate Johansen was so secretive? What had the vice-admiralty's investigation brought out, and what was known of
                    the noxious cult in Dunedin? And most marvelous of all, what deep and more than natural linkage of dates was
                    this which gave a malign and now undeniable significance to the various turns of
                    events so carefully noted by my uncle?March 1st--our February 28th according to the International Date Line--the
                    earthquake and storm had come. From Dunedin the _Alert_ and her noisome crew had darted eagerly forth as if
                    imperiously summoned, and on the other side of the earth poets and artists had
                    begun to dream of a strange, dank Cyclopean city whilst a young sculptor had
                    molded in his sleep the form of the dreaded Cthulhu. March 23rd the crew of the _Emma_ landed on an unknown island and left six men
                    dead; and on that date the dreams of sensitive men assumed a heightened
                    vividness and darkened with dread of a giant monster's malign pursuit, whilst an
                    architect had gone mad and a sculptor had lapsed suddenly into delirium! And what of this storm of April 2nd--the date on which all dreams of the dank
                    city ceased, and Wilcox emerged unharmed from the bondage of strange fever? What of all this--and of those hints of old Castro about the sunken, star-born
                    Old Ones and their coming reign; their faithful cult _and their mastery of
                    dreams_? Was I tottering on the brink of cosmic horrors beyond man's power to bear? If so, they must be horrors of the mind alone, for in some way the second of
                    April had put a stop to whatever monstrous menace had begun its siege of
                    mankind's soul.That evening, after a day of hurried cabling and arranging, I bade my host adieu
                    and took a train for San Francisco. In less than a month I was in Dunedin; where, however, I found that little was
                    known of the strange cult-members who had lingered in the old sea taverns. Waterfront scum was far too common for special mention; though there was vague
                    talk about one inland trip these mongrels had made, during which faint drumming
                    and red flame were noted on the distant hills.In Auckland I learned that Johansen had returned _with yellow hair turned white_
                    after a perfunctory and inconclusive questioning at Sydney, and had thereafter
                    sold his cottage in West Street and sailed with his wife to his old home in
                    Oslo. Of his stirring experience he would tell his friends no more than he had told
                    the admiralty officials, and all they could do was to give me his Oslo
                    address.After that I went to Sydney and talked profitlessly with seamen and members of
                    the vice-admiralty court. I saw the _Alert_, now sold and in commercial
                    use, at Circular Quay in Sydney Cove, but gained nothing from its non-committal
                    bulk. The crouching image with its cuttlefish head, dragon body, scaly
                    wings, and hieroglyphed pedestal, was preserved in the Museum at Hyde Park; and
                    I studied it long and well, finding it a thing of balefully exquisite
                    workmanship, and with the same utter mystery, terrible antiquity, and unearthly
                    strangeness of material which I had noted in Legrasse's smaller specimen.
                    Geologists, the curator told me, had found it a monstrous puzzle; for they vowed
                    that the world held no rock like it. Then I thought with a shudder of
                    what old Castro had told Legrasse about the primal Great Ones: "They had
                        come from the stars, and had brought Their images with Them."Shaken with such a mental revolution as I had never before known, I now resolved
                    to visit Mate Johansen in Oslo. Sailing for London, I re-embarked at once for the Norwegian capital; and one
                    autumn day landed at the trim wharves in the shadow of the Egeberg.Johansen's address, I discovered, lay in the Old Town of King Harold Haardrada,
                    which kept alive the name of Oslo during all the centuries that the greater city
                    masqueraded as "Christiania."
                I made the brief trip by taxicab, and knocked with palpitant heart at the
                    door of a neat and ancient building with plastered front. A sad-faced
                    woman in black answered my summons, and I was stung with disappointment when she
                    told me in halting English that Gustaf Johansen was no more.He had not long survived his return, said his wife, for the doings at sea in
                    1925 had broken him. He had told her no more than he had told the public,
                    but had left a long manuscript--of "technical matters" as he
                    said--written in English, evidently in order to safeguard her from the peril of
                    casual perusal. During a walk through a narrow lane near the Gothenburg
                    dock, a bundle of papers falling from an attic window had knocked him
                    down. Two Lascar sailors at once helped him to his feet, but before the
                    ambulance could reach him he was dead. Physicians found no adequate cause
                    for the end, and laid it to heart trouble and a weakened constitution.I now felt gnawing at my vitals that dark terror which will never leave me till
                    I, too, am at rest; "accidentally" or otherwise.
                    Persuading the widow that my connection with her husband's "technical
                        matters" was sufficient to entitle me to his manuscript, I bore the
                    document away and began to read it on the London boat. It was a simple, rambling thing--a naive sailor's effort at a post-facto
                    diary--and strove to recall day by day that last awful voyage. I can not attempt to transcribe it verbatim in all its cloudiness and
                    redundance, but I will tell its gist enough to show why the sound of the water
                    against the vessel's sides became so unendurable to me that I stopped my ears
                    with cotton.Johansen, thank God, did not know quite all, even though he saw the city and the
                    Thing, but I shall never sleep calmly again when I think of the horrors that
                    lurk ceaselessly behind life in time and in space, and of those unhallowed
                    blasphemies from elder stars which dream beneath the sea, known and favored by a
                    nightmare cult ready and eager to loose them on the world whenever another
                    earthquake shall heave their monstrous stone city again to the sun and air.Johansen's voyage had begun just as he told it to the vice-admiralty. The _Emma_, in ballast, had cleared Auckland on February 20th, and had felt the
                    full force of that earthquake-born tempest which must have heaved up from the
                    sea-bottom the horrors that filled men's dreams. Once more under control, the ship was making good progress when held up by the
                    _Alert_ on March 22nd, and I could feel the mate's regret as he wrote of her
                    bombardment and sinking. Of the swarthy cult-fiends on the _Alert_ he speaks with significant horror. There was some peculiarly abominable quality about them which made their
                    destruction seem almost a duty, and Johansen shows ingenuous wonder at the
                    charge of ruthlessness brought against his party during the proceedings of the
                    court of inquiry. Then, driven ahead by curiosity in their captured yacht under Johansen's
                    command, the men sight a great stone pillar sticking out of the sea, and in
                    S. Latitude 47° 9', W. Longitude 126° 43' come upon a coastline of mingled mud, ooze, and weedy
                    Cyclopean masonry which can be nothing less than the tangible substance of
                    earth's supreme terror--the nightmare corpse-city of R'lyeh, that was built in
                    measureless eons behind history by the vast, loathsome shapes that seeped down
                    from the dark stars. There lay great Cthulhu and his hordes, hidden in green slimy vaults and sending
                    out at last, after cycles incalculable, the thoughts that spread fear to the
                    dreams of the sensitive and called imperiously to the faithful to come on a
                    pilgrimage of liberation and restoration. All this Johansen did not suspect, but God knows he soon saw enough!I suppose that only a single mountain-top, the hideous monolith-crowned citadel
                    whereon great Cthulhu was buried, actually emerged from the waters. When I think of the _extent_ of all that may be brooding down there I almost
                    wish to kill myself forthwith. Johansen and his men were awed by the cosmic majesty of this dripping Babylon of
                    elder demons, and must have guessed without guidance that it was nothing of this
                    or of any sane planet. Awe at the unbelievable size of the greenish stone blocks, at the dizzying
                    height of the great carven monolith, and at the stupefying identity of the
                    colossal statues and bas-reliefs with the queer image found in the shrine on the
                    _Alert_, is poignantly visible in every line of the mate's frightened
                    description.Without knowing what futurism is like, Johansen achieved something very close to
                    it when he spoke of the city; for instead of describing any definite structure
                    or building, he dwells only on the broad impressions of vast angles and stone
                    surfaces--surfaces too great to belong to anything right or proper for this
                    earth, and impious with horrible images and hieroglyphs. I mention his talk about _angles_ because it suggests something Wilcox had told
                    me of his awful dreams. He had said that the _geometry_ of the dream-place he saw was abnormal,
                    non-Euclidean, and loathsomely redolent of spheres and dimensions apart from
                    ours. Now an unlettered seaman felt the same thing whilst gazing at the terrible
                    reality.Johansen and his men landed at a sloping mud-bank on this monstrous Acropolis,
                    and clambered slipperily up over titan oozy blocks which could have been no
                    mortal staircase. The very sun of heaven seemed distorted when viewed through the polarizing
                    miasma welling out from this sea-soaked perversion, and twisted menace and
                    suspense lurked leeringly in those crazily elusive angles of carven rock where a
                    second glance showed concavity after the first showed convexity.Something very like fright had come over all the explorers before anything more
                    definite than rock and ooze and weed was seen. Each would have fled had he not feared the scorn of the others, and it was only
                    half-heartedly that they searched--vainly, as it proved--for some portable
                    souvenir to bear away.It was Rodriguez the Portuguese who climbed up the foot of the monolith and
                    shouted of what he had found. The rest followed him, and looked curiously at the immense carved door with the
                    now familiar squid-dragon bas-relief. It was, Johansen said, like a great barn-door; and they all felt that it was a
                    door because of the ornate lintel, threshold, and jambs around it, though they
                    could not decide whether it lay flat like a trap-door or slantwise like an
                    outside cellar-door. As Wilcox would have said, the geometry of the place was all wrong. One could not be sure that the sea and the ground were horizontal, hence the
                    relative position of everything else seemed fantasmally variable.Briden pushed at the stone in several places without result. Then Donovan felt over it delicately around the edge, pressing each point
                    separately as he went. He climbed interminably along the grotesque stone molding--that is, one would
                    call it climbing if the thing was not after all horizontal--and the men wondered
                    how any door in the universe could be so vast. Then, very softly and slowly, the acre-great panel began to give inward at the
                    top; and they saw that it was balanced.Donovan slid or somehow propelled himself down or along the jamb and rejoined his
                    fellows, and everyone watched the queer recession of the monstrously carven
                    portal. In this fantasy of prismatic distortion it moved anomalously in a diagonal way,
                    so that all the rules of matter and perspective seemed upset.The aperture was black with a darkness almost material. That tenebrousness was indeed a _positive quality_; for it obscured such parts
                    of the inner walls as ought to have been revealed, and actually burst forth like
                    smoke from its eon-long imprisonment, visibly darkening the sun as it slunk away
                    into the shrunken and gibbous sky on flapping membranous wings. The odor arising from the newly opened depths was intolerable, and at length the
                    quick-eared Hawkins thought he heard a nasty, slopping sound down there. Everyone listened, and everyone was listening still when It lumbered
                    slobberingly into sight and gropingly squeezed Its gelatinous green immensity
                    through the black doorway into the tainted outside air of that poison city of
                    madness.Poor Johansen's handwriting almost gave out when he wrote of this. Of the six men who never reached the ship, he thinks two perished of pure fright
                    in that accursed instant. The Thing can not be described--there is no language for such abysms of
                    shrieking and immemorial lunacy, such eldritch contradictions of all matter,
                    force, and cosmic order. A mountain walked or stumbled. God! What wonder that across the earth a great architect went mad, and poor Wilcox
                    raved with fever in that telepathic instant? The Thing of the idols, the green, sticky spawn of the stars, had awaked to
                    claim his own. The stars were right again, and what an age-old cult had failed to do by design,
                    a band of innocent sailors had done by accident. After vigintillions of years great Cthulhu was loose again, and ravening for
                    delight.Three men were swept up by the flabby claws before anybody turned. God rest them, if there be any rest in the universe. They were Donovan, Guerrera and Angstrom. Parker slipped as the other three were plunging frenziedly over endless vistas
                    of green-crusted rock to the boat, and Johansen swears he was swallowed up by an
                    angle of masonry which shouldn't have been there; an angle which was acute, but
                    behaved as if it were obtuse. So only Briden and Johansen reached the boat, and pulled desperately for the
                    _Alert_ as the mountainous monstrosity flopped down the slimy stones and
                    hesitated floundering at the edge of the water.Steam had not been suffered to go down entirely, despite the departure of all
                    hands for the shore; and it was the work of only a few moments of feverish
                    rushing up and down between wheels and engines to get the _Alert_ under way. Slowly, amidst the distorted horrors of that indescribable scene, she began to
                    churn the lethal waters; whilst on the masonry of that charnel shore that was
                    not of earth the titan Thing from the stars slavered and gibbered like Polypheme
                    cursing the fleeing ship of Odysseus. Then, bolder than the storied Cyclops, great Cthulhu slid greasily into the
                    water and began to pursue with vast wave-raising strokes of cosmic potency. Briden looked back and went mad, laughing shrilly as he kept on laughing at
                    intervals till death found him one night in the cabin whilst Johansen was
                    wandering deliriously.But Johansen had not given out yet. Knowing that the Thing could surely overtake the _Alert_ until steam was fully
                    up, he resolved on a desperate chance; and, setting the engine for full speed,
                    ran lightning-like on deck and reversed the wheel. There was a mighty eddying and foaming in the noisome brine, and as the steam
                    mounted higher and higher the brave Norwegian drove his vessel head on against
                    the pursuing jelly which rose above the unclean froth like the stern of a demon
                    galleon. The awful squid-head with writhing feelers came nearly up to the bowsprit of the
                    sturdy yacht, but Johansen drove on relentlessly.There was a bursting as of an exploding bladder, a slushy nastiness as of a
                    cloven sunfish, a stench as of a thousand opened graves, and a sound that the
                    chronicler would not put on paper. For an instant the ship was befouled by an acrid and blinding green cloud, and
                    then there was only a venomous seething astern; where--God in heaven!--the scattered plasticity of that nameless sky-spawn was nebulously
                    _recombining_ in its hateful original form, whilst its distance widened every
                    second as the _Alert_ gained impetus from its mounting steam.That was all. After that Johansen only brooded over the idol in the cabin and attended to a
                    few matters of food for himself and the laughing maniac by his side. He did not try to navigate after the first bold flight, for the reaction had
                    taken something out of his soul. Then came the storm of April 2nd, and a gathering of the clouds about his
                    consciousness. There is a sense of spectral whirling through liquid gulfs of infinity, of
                    dizzying rides through reeling universes on a comet's tail, and of hysterical
                    plunges from the pit to the moon and from the moon back again to the pit, all
                    livened by a cachinnating chorus of the distorted, hilarious elder gods and the
                    green, bat-winged mocking imps of Tartarus.Out of that dream came rescue--the _Vigilant_, the vice-admiralty court, the
                    streets of Dunedin, and the long voyage back home to the old house by the
                    Egeberg. He could not tell--they would think him mad. He would write of what he knew before death came, but his wife must not
                    guess. Death would be a boon if only it could blot out the memories.That was the document I read, and now I have placed it in the tin box beside the
                    bas-relief and the papers of Professor Angell. With it shall go this record of mine--this test of my own sanity, wherein is
                    pieced together that which I hope may never be pieced together again. I have looked upon all that the universe has to hold of horror, and even the
                    skies of spring and the flowers of summer must ever afterward be poison to
                    me. But I do not think my life will be long. As my uncle went, as poor Johansen went, so I shall go. I know too much, and the cult still lives.Cthulhu still lives, too, I suppose, again in that chasm of stone which has
                    shielded him since the sun was young. His accursed city is sunken once more, for the _Vigilant_ sailed over the spot
                    after the April storm; but his ministers on earth still bellow and prance and
                    slay around idol-capped monoliths in lonely places. He must have been trapped by the sinking whilst within his black abyss, or else
                    the world would by now be screaming with fright and frenzy. Who knows the end? What has risen may sink, and what has sunk may rise. Loathsomeness waits and dreams in the deep, and decay spreads over the tottering
                    cities of men. A time will come--but I must not and can not think! Let me pray that, if I do not survive this manuscript, my executors may put
                    caution before audacity and see that it meets no other eye.During the winter of 1927-28 Federal government officials made a strange and
                    secret investigation of certain conditions in the ancient Massachusetts seaport
                    of Innsmouth. The public first learned of it in February, when a vast series of raids and
                    arrests occurred, followed by the deliberate burning and dynamiting--under
                    suitable precautions--of an enormous number of crumbling, worm-eaten, and
                    supposedly empty houses along the abandoned waterfront. Uninquiring souls let this occurrence pass as one of the major clashes in a
                    spasmodic war on liquor.Keener news-followers, however, wondered at the prodigious number of arrests, the
                    abnormally large force of men used in making them, and the secrecy surrounding
                    the disposal of the prisoners. No trials, or even definite charges, were reported; nor were any of the captives
                    seen thereafter in the regular jails of the nation. There were vague statements about disease and concentration camps, and later
                    about dispersal in various naval and military prisons, but nothing positive ever
                    developed.Complaints from many liberal organizations were met with long confidential
                    discussions, and representatives were taken on trips to certain camps and
                    prisons. As a result, these societies became surprisingly passive and reticent. Newspaper men were harder to manage, but seemed largely to cooperate with the
                    government in the end. Only one paper--a tabloid always discounted because of its wild
                    policy--mentioned the deep-diving submarine that discharged torpedoes downward
                    in the marine abyss just beyond Devil Reef. That item, gathered by chance in a haunt of sailors, seemed indeed rather
                    far-fetched; since the low, black reef lies a full mile and a half out from
                    Innsmouth Harbor.But at last I am going to defy the ban on speech about this thing. Results, I am certain, are so thorough that no public harm save a shock of
                    repulsion could ever accrue from a hinting of what was found by those horrified
                    raiders at Innsmouth. For my contact with this affair has been closer than that of any other layman,
                    and I have carried away impressions which are yet to drive me to drastic
                    measures.It was I who fled frantically out of Innsmouth in the early morning hours of July
                    16, 1927, and whose frightened appeals for government inquiry and action brought
                    on the whole reported episode. I was willing enough to stay mute while the affair was fresh and uncertain; but
                    now that it is an old story, with public interest and curiosity gone, I have an
                    odd craving to whisper about those few frightful hours in that ill-rumored and
                    evilly-shadowed seaport of death and blasphemous abnormality.I never heard of Innsmouth till the day before I saw it for the first and--so
                    far--last time. I was celebrating my coming of age by a tour of New England--sightseeing,
                    antiquarian, and genealogical--and had planned to go directly from ancient
                    Newburyport to Arkham, whence my mother's family was derived. I had no car, but was traveling by train, trolley, and motor-coach, always
                    seeking the cheapest possible route. In Newburyport they told me that the steam train was the thing to take to
                    Arkham; and it was only at the station ticket-office, when I demurred at the
                    high fare, that I learned about Innsmouth. The stout, shrewd-faced agent, whose speech showed him to be no local man,
                    seemed sympathetic toward my efforts at economy, and made a suggestion that none
                    of my other informants had offered.That was the first I ever heard of shadowed Innsmouth. Any reference to a town not shown on common maps or listed in recent guidebooks
                    would have interested me, and the agent's old manner of allusion roused
                    something like real curiosity. So I asked the agent to tell me something about it.He was very deliberate, and spoke with an air of feeling slightly superior to
                    what he said.And so I spent part of that evening at the Newburyport Public Library looking up
                    data about Innsmouth. The Essex County histories on the library shelves had very little to say, except
                    that the town was founded in 1643, noted for shipbuilding before the Revolution,
                    a seat of great marine prosperity in the early 19th century, and later a minor
                    factory center using the Manuxet as power. The epidemic and riots of 1846 were very sparsely treated, as if they formed a
                    discredit to the country.References to decline were few, though the significance of the later record was
                    unmistakable. After the Civil War all industrial life was confined to the Marsh Refining
                    Company, and the marketing of gold ingots formed the only remaining bit of major
                    commerce aside from the eternal fishing.Most interesting of all was a glancing reference to the strange jewelry vaguely
                    associated with Innsmouth. It had evidently impressed the whole countryside more than a little, for mention
                    was made of specimens in the museum of Miskatonic University at Arkham, and in
                    the display room of the Newburyport Historical Society. I resolved to see the local sample--said to be a large, queerly-proportioned
                    thing evidently meant for a tiara--if it could possibly be arranged.The librarian gave me a note of introduction to the curator of the Society, a
                    Miss Anna Tilton, who lived nearby, and after a brief explanation that ancient
                    gentlewoman was kind enough to pilot me into the closed building, since the hour
                    was not outrageously late. The collection was a notable one indeed, but in my present mood I had eyes for
                    nothing but the bizarre object which glistened in a corner cupboard under the
                    electric lights.It took no excessive sensitiveness to beauty to make me literally gasp at the
                    strange, unearthly splendor of the alien, opulent phantasy that rested there on
                    a purple velvet cushion. The longer I looked, the more the thing fascinated me; and in this fascination
                    there was a curiously disturbing element hardly to be classified or accounted
                    for. I decided that it was the queer other-worldly quality of the art which made me
                    uneasy. It was as if the workmanship were that of another planet.The patterns all hinted of remote secrets and unimaginable abysses in time and
                    space, and the monotonously aquatic nature of the reliefs became almost
                    sinister. Among these reliefs were fabulous monsters of abhorrent grotesqueness and
                    malignity--wholly primal and awesomely ancestral.At times I fancied that every contour of these blasphemous fish-frogs was
                    overflowing with the ultimate quintessence of unknown and inhuman evil.In odd contrast to the tiara's aspect was its brief and prosy history as related
                    by Miss Tilton. It had been pawned for a ridiculous sum at a shop in State Street in 1873, by a
                    drunken Innsmouth man shortly afterward killed in a brawl.Miss Tilton was inclined to believe that it formed part of some exotic pirate
                    hoard discovered by old Captain Obed Marsh. This view was surely not weakened by the insistent offers of purchase at a high
                    price which the Marshes began to make as soon as they knew of its presence, and
                    which they repeated to this day despite the Society's unvarying determination
                    not to sell.As the good lady showed me out of the building, she assured me that the rumors of
                    devil-worship were partly justified by a peculiar secret cult which had gained
                    force there and engulfed all the orthodox churches.Shortly before ten the next morning I stood with my one small valise in front
                    of Hammond's Drug Store in old Market Square waiting for the Innsmouth
                    bus. In a few moments a small motor-coach of extreme decrepitude and
                    dirty gray color rattled down State Street, made a turn, and drew up at the curb
                    beside me.There were only three passengers--dark, unkempt men of sullen visage and somewhat
                    youthful cast--and when the vehicle stopped they clumsily shambled out and began
                    walking up State Street in a silent, almost furtive fashion. The driver also alighted. This, I reflected, must be the Joe Sargent mentioned by the ticket-agent; and
                    even before I had noticed any details there spread over me a wave of spontaneous
                    aversion which could be neither checked nor explained.He was a thin, stoop-shouldered man not much under six feet tall, dressed in
                    shabby blue civilian clothes and wearing a frayed gray golf cap. His age was perhaps thirty-five, but the odd, deep creases in the sides of his
                    neck made him seem older when one did not study his dull, expressionless
                    face. He had a narrow head, bulging, watery blue eyes that seemed never to wink, a
                    flat nose, a receding forehead and chin, and singularly undeveloped ears. As he walked toward the bus I observed his peculiarly shambling gait and saw
                    that his feet were inordinately immense. The more I studied them the more I wondered how he could buy any shoes to fit
                    them.A certain greasiness about the fellow increased my dislike. He was evidently given to working or lounging around the fish docks, and carried
                    with him much of their characteristic smell. Just what foreign blood was in him I could not even guess.I was sorry when I saw that there would be no other passengers on the
                    bus. Somehow I did not like the idea of riding alone with this
                    driver.At length the decrepit vehicle started with a jerk, and rattled noisily past the
                    old brick buildings of State Street amidst a cloud of vapor from the
                    exhaust.The day was warm and sunny, but the landscape of sand, sedge-grass, and stunted
                    shrubbery became more and more desolate as we proceeded. Out the window I could see the blue water and the sandy line of Plum Island, and
                    we presently drew very near the beach as our narrow road veered off from the
                    main highway to Rowley and Ipswich.At last we lost sight of Plum Island and saw the vast expanse of the open
                    Atlantic on our left. Our narrow course began to climb steeply, and I felt a singular sense of
                    disquiet in looking at the lonely crest ahead where the rutted roadway met the
                    sky. It was as if the bus were about to keep on its ascent leaving the sane earth
                    altogether and merging with the unknown arcana of upper air and cryptical
                    sky. The smell of the sea took on ominous implications, and the silent driver's bent,
                    rigid back and narrow head became more and more hateful. As I looked at him I saw that the back of his head was almost as hairless as his
                    face, having only a few straggling yellow strands upon a gray scabrous
                    surface.Then we reached the crest and beheld the outspread valley beyond, where the
                    Manuxet joins the sea just north of the long line of cliffs that culminate in
                    Kingsport Head; all my attention was captured by the nearer panorama just below
                    me. I had, I realized, come face to face with rumor-shadowed Innsmouth.It was a town of wide extent and dense construction, yet one with a portentous
                    dearth of visible life. The vast huddle of sagging gambrel roofs and peaked gables conveyed with
                    offensive clearness the idea of wormy decay, and as we approached along the now
                    descending road I could see that many roofs had wholly caved in. Stretching inland I saw the rusted, grass-grown line of the abandoned railway,
                    with leaning telegraph-poles now devoid of wires.Here and there the ruins of wharves jutted out from the shore to end in
                    indeterminate rottenness, those farthest south seeming the most decayed. And far out at sea, despite a high tide, I glimpsed a long, black line scarcely
                    rising above the water yet carrying a suggestion of odd latent malignancy. This, I knew, must be Devil Reef. As I looked, a subtle, curious sense of beckoning seemed superadded to the grim
                    repulsion; and oddly enough, I found this overtone more disturbing than the
                    primary impression.As the bus reached a lower level I began to catch the steady note of a waterfall
                    through the unnatural stillness. The leaning, unpainted houses grew thicker, lined both sides of the road, and
                    displayed more urban tendencies than did those we were leaving behind. The panorama ahead had contracted to a street scene, and in spots I could see
                    where a cobblestone pavement and stretches of brick sidewalk had formerly
                    existed. All the houses were apparently deserted, and there were occasional gaps where
                    tumbledown chimneys and cellar walls told of buildings that had collapsed. Pervading everything was the most nauseous fishy odor imaginable.And I was not to reach my destination without one other very strong impression
                    of poignantly disagreeable quality. The bus had come to a sort of open
                    concourse or radial point with churches on two sides and the bedraggled remains
                    of a circular green in the center, and I was looking at a large pillared hall on
                    the right-hand junction ahead.The door of the church basement was open, revealing a rectangle of blackness
                    inside. And as I looked, a certain object crossed or seemed to cross that dark
                    rectangle; burning into my brain a momentary conception of nightmare which was
                    all the more maddening because analysis could not show a single nightmarish
                    quality in it.It was a living object--the first except the driver that I had seen since
                    entering the compact part of the town--and had I been in a steadier mood I would
                    have found nothing whatever of terror in it. Clearly, as I realized a moment later, it was the pastor; clad in some peculiar
                    vestments doubtless introduced since the Order of Dagon had modified the ritual
                    of the local churches. The thing which had probably caught my first subconscious glance and supplied
                    the touch of bizarre horror was the tall tiara he wore; an almost exact
                    duplicate of the one Miss Tilton had shown me the previous evening. This, acting on my imagination, had supplied namelessly sinister qualities to
                    the indeterminate face and robed, shambling form beneath it.A very thin sprinkling of repellent-looking youngish people now became visible on
                    the sidewalks--lone individuals, and silent knots of two or three. The lower floors of the crumbling houses sometimes harbored small shops with
                    dingy signs, and I noticed a parked truck or two as we rattled along. The sound of waterfalls became more and more distinct, and presently I saw a
                    fairly deep river-gorge ahead, spanned by a wide, iron-railed highway bridge
                    beyond which a large square opened out. Then we rolled into the large semicircular square across the river and drew up
                    on the right-hand side in front of a tall, cupola-crowned building with remnants
                    of yellow paint and with a half-effaced sign proclaiming it to be the Gilman
                    House.I was glad to get out of that bus, and at once proceeded to check my valise in
                    the shabby hotel lobby.For some reason or other I chose to make my first inquiries at the chain grocery,
                    whose personnel was not likely to be native to Innsmouth. I found a solitary boy of about seventeen in charge, and was pleased to note the
                    brightness and affability which promised cheerful information. He seemed exceptionally eager to talk, and I soon gathered that he did not like
                    the place, its fishy smell, or its furtive people. His family did not like him to work in Innsmouth, but the chain had transferred
                    him there and he did not wish to give up his job.There was, he said, no public library or chamber of commerce in Innsmouth, but I
                    could probably find my way about. The street I had come down was Federal. West of that were the fine old residence streets--Broad, Washington, Lafayette,
                    and Adams--and east of it were the shoreward slums.Certain spots were almost forbidden territory, as he had learned at considerable
                    cost. One must not, for example, linger much around the Marsh refinery, or around any
                    of the still used churches, or around the pillared Order of Dagon Hall at New
                    Church Green. Those churches were very odd--all violently disavowed by their respective
                    denominations elsewhere, and apparently using the queerest kind of ceremonials
                    and clerical vestments.As for the Innsmouth people--the youth hardly knew what to make of them. Their appearance--especially those staring, unwinking eyes which one never saw
                    shut--was certainly shocking enough--and their voices were disgusting. It was awful to hear them chanting in their churches at night, and especially
                    during their main festivals or revivals, which fell twice a year on April 30 and
                    October 31.They were very fond of the water, and swam a great deal in both river and
                    harbor. Swimming races out to Devil Reef were very common, and everyone in sight seemed
                    well able to share in this arduous sport.It would be of no use, my informant said, to ask the natives anything about the
                    place. The only one who would talk was a very aged but normal-looking man who lived at
                    the poorhouse on the north rim of the town and spent his time walking about or
                    lounging around the fire station. This hoary character, Zadok Allen, was 96 years old and somewhat touched in the
                    head, besides being the town drunkard. He was a strange, furtive creature who constantly looked over his shoulder as if
                    afraid of something, and when sober could not be persuaded to talk at all with
                    strangers. He was, however, unable to resist any offer of his favorite poison; and once
                    drunk would furnish the most astonishing fragments of whispered
                    reminiscence.After all, though, little useful data could be gained from him; since his stories
                    were all insane, incomplete hints of impossible marvels and horrors which could
                    have no source save in his own distorted fancy. Nobody ever believed him, but the natives did not like him to drink and talk
                    with any strangers; and it was not always safe to be seen questioning him. It was probably from him that some of the wildest popular whispers and delusions
                    were derived.The Marshes, together with the other three gently bred families of the town--the
                    Waites, the Gilmans, and the Eliots--were all very retiring. They lived in immense houses along Washington Street, and several were reputed
                    to harbor in concealment certain kinsfolk whose personal aspect forbade public
                    view, and whose deaths had been reported and recorded.Warning me that most of the street signs were down, the youth drew for my benefit
                    a rough but ample and painstaking sketch map of the town's salient features. After a moment's study I felt sure that it would be of great help, and pocketed
                    it with profuse thanks.Thus began my systematic though half-bewildered tour of Innsmouth's narrow,
                    shadow-blighted ways. Crossing the bridge and turning toward the roar of the lower falls, I passed
                    close to the Marsh refinery, which seemed oddly free from the noise of
                    industry. This building stood on the steep river bluff near a bridge and an open
                    confluence of streets which I took to be the earliest civic center, displaced
                    after the Revolution by the present Town Square.Re-crossing the gorge on the Main Street bridge, I struck a region of utter
                    desertion which somehow made me shudder. Collapsing huddles of gambrel roofs formed a jagged and fantastic skyline, above
                    which rose the ghoulish, decapitated steeple of an ancient church.Fish Street was as deserted as Main, though it differed in having many brick and
                    stone warehouses still in excellent shape. Water Street was almost its duplicate, save that there were great seaward gaps
                    where wharves had been. Not a living thing did I see, except for the scattered fishermen on the distant
                    breakwater, and not a sound did I hear save the lapping of the harbor tides and
                    the roar of the falls in the Manuxet.I kept north along Main to Martin, then turning inland, crossing Federal Street
                    safely north of the Green, and entering the decayed patrician neighborhood of
                    northern Broad, Washington, Lafayette, and Adams Streets. Following Washington Street toward the river, I now faced a zone of former
                    industry and commerce; noting the ruins of a factory ahead, and seeing others,
                    with the traces of an old railway station and covered railway bridge beyond up
                    the gorge on my right.The uncertain bridge now before me was posted with a warning sign, but I took the
                    risk and crossed again to the south bank where traces of life reappeared. Furtive, shambling creatures stared cryptically in my direction, and more normal
                    faces eyed me coldly and curiously. Innsmouth was rapidly becoming intolerable, and I turned down Paine Street
                    toward the Square in the hope of getting some vehicle to take me to Arkham
                    before the still-distant starting time of that sinister bus.It was then that I saw the tumbledown fire station on my left, and noticed the
                    red-faced, bushy-bearded, watery-eyed old man in nondescript rags who sat on a
                    bench in front of it talking with a pair of unkempt but not abnormal-looking
                    firemen. This, of course, must be Zadok Allen, the half-crazed, liquorish non-agenarian
                    whose tales of old Innsmouth and its shadow were so hideous and incredible.I had been assured that the old man could do nothing but hint at wild,
                    disjointed, and incredible legends, and I had been warned that the natives made
                    it unsafe to be seen talking with him; yet the thought of this aged witness to
                    the town's decay, with memories going back to the early days of ships and
                    factories, was a _lure_ that no amount of reason could make me resist. Curiosity flared up beyond sense and caution, and in my youthful egotism I
                    fancied I might be able to sift a nucleus of real history from the confused,
                    extravagant outpouring I would probably extract with the aid of whiskey.A quart bottle of such was easily, though not cheaply, obtained in the rear of a
                    dingy variety-store just off the Square in Eliot Street.Re-entering the Square I saw that luck was with me; for--shuffling out of Paine
                    Street around the corner of the Gilman House--I glimpsed nothing less than the
                    tall, lean, tattered form of old Zadok Allen himself. In accordance with my plan, I attracted his attention by brandishing my
                    newly-purchased bottle; and soon realized that he had begun to shuffle wistfully
                    after me as I turned into Waite Street on my way to the most deserted region I
                    could think of. Before I reached Main Street I could hear a faint and wheezy "Hey,
                        Mister!" behind me, and I presently allowed the old man to catch up
                    and take copious pulls from the quart bottle. I began putting out feelers as we walked along to Water Street and turned
                    southward amidst the omnipresent desolation and crazily tilted ruins, but found
                    that the aged tongue did not loosen as quickly as I had expected. At length I saw a grass-grown opening toward the sea between crumbling brick
                    walls, with the weedy length of an earth-and-masonry wharf projecting
                    beyond. Piles of moss-covered stones near the water promised tolerable seats, and the
                    scene was sheltered from all possible view by a ruined warehouse on the
                    north.About four hours remained for conversation if I were to catch the eight o'clock
                    coach for Arkham, and I began to dole out more liquor to the ancient tippler;
                    meanwhile eating my own frugal lunch. In my donations I was careful not to overshoot the mark, for I did not wish
                    Zadok's vinous garrulousness to pass into a stupor. After an hour his furtive taciturnity showed signs of disappearing, and
                    something or other had caused his wandering gaze to light on the low, distant
                    line of Devil Reef, then showing plainly and almost fascinatingly above the
                    waves. He bent toward me, took hold of my coat lapel, and hissed out some hints that
                    could not be mistaken.The old man's whisper grew fainter, and I found myself shuddering at the terrible
                    and sincere portentousness of his intonation, even though I knew his tale could
                    be nothing but drunken phantasy.Here the old man faltered, mumbled, and lapsed into a moody and apprehensive
                    silence; glancing nervously over his shoulder and then turning back to stare
                    fascinatedly at the distant black reef. When I spoke to him he did not answer, so I knew I would have to let him finish
                    the bottle. He licked its nose and slipped it into his pocket, then beginning to nod and
                    whisper softly to himself. I bent close to catch any articulate words he might utter, and thought I saw a
                    sardonic smile behind the stained, bushy whiskers. Yes--he was really forming words, and I could grasp a fair proportion of
                    them.He stopped again, and from the look in his watery blue eyes I feared he was close
                    to a stupor after all. But when I gently shook his shoulder he turned on me with astonishing alertness
                    and snapped out some more obscure phrases.The watery blue eyes were almost savage and maniacal now, and the dirty white
                    beard bristled electrically. Old Zadok probably saw me shrink back, for he began to cackle evilly.The old man was getting hysterical, and I began to shiver with a nameless
                    alarm. He laid a gnarled claw on my shoulder, and it seemed to me that its shaking was
                    not altogether that of mirth.Zadok was showing signs of fright and exhaustion, and I let him keep silence for
                    a while, though glancing apprehensively at my watch. The tide had turned and was coming in now, and the sound of the waves seemed to
                    arouse him.The old man was panting, and perspiring profusely. His grip on my shoulder tightened.Old Zadok began to moan now, and tears were coursing down his channelled cheeks
                    into the depths of his beard.The sound of the incoming tide was now very insistent, and little by little it
                    seemed to change the old man's mood from maudlin tearfulness to watchful
                    fear. He would pause now and then to renew those nervous glances over his shoulder or
                    out toward the reef, and despite the wild absurdity of his tale, I could not
                    help beginning to share his vague apprehensiveness. Zadok now grew shriller, and seemed to be trying to whip up his courage with
                    louder speech.Zadok was really screaming now, and the mad frenzy of his voice disturbed me more
                    than I care to own.The hideous suddenness and inhuman frightfulness of the old man's shriek almost
                    made me faint. His eyes, looking past me toward the malodorous sea, were positively starting
                    from his head; while his face was a mask of fear worthy of Greek tragedy. His bony claw dug monstrously into my shoulder, and he made no motion as I
                    turned my head to look at whatever he had glimpsed.There was nothing that I could see. Only the incoming tide, with perhaps one set of ripples more local than the
                    long-flung line of breakers. But now Zadok was shaking me, and I turned back to watch the melting of that
                    fear-frozen face into a chaos of twitching eyelids and mumbling gums. Presently his voice came back--albeit as a trembling whisper.Another heavy wave dashed against the loosening masonry of the bygone wharf, and
                    changed the mad ancient's whisper to another inhuman and blood-curdling
                    scream.Before I could recover my scattered wits he had relaxed his clutch on my shoulder
                    and dashed wildly inland toward the street, reeling northward around the ruined
                    warehouse wall.I glanced back at the sea, but there was nothing there. And when I reached Water Street and looked along it toward the north there was
                    no remaining trace of Zadok Allen.I can hardly describe the mood in which I was left by this harrowing episode--an
                    episode at once mad and pitiful, grotesque and terrifying. The grocery boy had prepared me for it, yet the reality left me none the less
                    bewildered and disturbed. Puerile though the story was, old Zadok's insane earnestness and horror had
                    communicated to me a mounting unrest which joined with my earlier sense of
                    loathing for the town and its blight of intangible shadow.The hour had grown perilously late--my watch said 7:15, and the Arkham bus left
                    Town Square at eight--so I tried to give my thoughts as neutral and practical a
                    cast as possible, meanwhile walking rapidly through the deserted streets of
                    gaping roofs and leaning houses toward the hotel where I had checked my valise
                    and would find my bus.Studying the grocery youth's map and seeking a route I had not traversed before,
                    I chose Marsh Street instead of State for my approach to Town Square. Near the corner of Fall Street I began to see scattered groups of furtive
                    whisperers, and when I finally reached the Square I saw that almost all the
                    loiterers were congregated around the door of the Gilman House. It seemed as if many bulging, watery, unwinking eyes looked oddly at me as I
                    claimed my valise in the lobby, and I hoped that none of these unpleasant
                    creatures would be my fellow-passengers on the coach.The bus, rather early, rattled in with three passengers somewhat before eight,
                    and an evil-looking fellow on the sidewalk muttered a few indistinguishable
                    words to the driver. I was, it appeared, in very bad luck. There had been something wrong with the engine, despite the excellent time made
                    from Newburyport, and the bus could not complete the journey to Arkham. No, it could not possibly be repaired that night, nor was there any other way of
                    getting transportation out of Innsmouth, either to Arkham or elsewhere. Sargent was sorry, but I would have to stop over at the Gilman. Probably the clerk would make the price easy for me, but there was nothing else
                    to do. Almost dazed by this sudden obstacle, and violently dreading the fall of night
                    in this decaying and half-unlighted town, I left the bus and reentered the hotel
                    lobby; where the sullen, queer-looking night clerk told me I could have Room 428
                    on next the top floor--large, but without running water--for a dollar.Despite what I had heard of this hotel in Newburyport, I signed the register,
                    paid my dollar, let the clerk take my valise, and followed that sour, solitary
                    attendant up three creaking flights of stairs past dusty corridors which seemed
                    wholly devoid of life. My room, a dismal rear one with two windows and bare, cheap furnishings,
                    over-looked a dingy courtyard otherwise hemmed in by low, deserted brick blocks,
                    and commanded a view of decrepit westward-stretching roofs with a marshy
                    countryside beyond. At the end of the corridor was a bathroom--a discouraging relique with ancient
                    marble bowl, tin tub, faint electric light, and musty wooden panelling around
                    all the plumbing fixtures.As twilight deepened I turned on the one feeble electric bulb over the cheap,
                    iron-framed bed, and tried as best I could to read. I felt it advisable to keep my mind wholesomely occupied, for it would not do to
                    brood over the abnormalities of this ancient, blight-shadowed town while I was
                    still within its borders. The insane yarn I had heard from the aged drunkard did not promise very pleasant
                    dreams, and I felt I must keep the image of his wild, watery eyes as far as
                    possible from my imagination.Another thing that disturbed me was the absence of a bolt on the door of my
                    room. One had been there, as marks clearly showed, but there were signs of recent
                    removal. No doubt it had become out of order, like so many other things in this decrepit
                    edifice. In my nervousness I looked around and discovered a bolt on the clothespress
                    which seemed to be of the same size, judging from the marks, as the one formerly
                    on the door. To gain a partial relief from the general tension I busied myself by
                    transferring this hardware to the vacant place with the aid of a handy
                    three-in-one device including a screw-driver which I kept on my keyring. The bolt fitted perfectly, and I was somewhat relieved when I knew that I could
                    shoot it firmly upon retiring. There were adequate bolts on the two lateral doors to connecting rooms, and
                    these I proceeded to fasten.I did not undress, but decided to read till I was sleepy and then lie down with
                    only my coat, collar, and shoes off. Taking a pocket flashlight from my valise, I placed it in my trousers, so that I
                    could read my watch if I woke up later in the dark. Drowsiness, however, did not come; and when I stopped to analyze my thoughts I
                    found to my disquiet that I was really unconsciously listening for
                    something--listening for something which I dreaded but could not name.At length, feeling a fatigue which had nothing of drowsiness in it, I bolted the
                    newly outfitted hall door, turned off the light, and threw myself down on the
                    hard, uneven bed--coat, collar, shoes, and all. In the darkness every faint noise of the night seemed magnified, and a flood of
                    doubly unpleasant thoughts swept over me. I was sorry I had put out the light, yet was too tired to rise and turn it on
                    again. Then, after a long, dreary interval, and prefaced by a fresh creaking of stairs
                    and corridor, there came that soft, damnably unmistakable sound which seemed
                    like a malign fulfilment of all my apprehensions. Without the least shadow of a doubt, the lock on my hall door was being
                    tried--cautiously, furtively, tentatively--with a key.The change in the menace from vague premonition to immediate reality was a
                    profound shock, and fell upon me with the force of a genuine blow. It never once occurred to me that the fumbling might be a mere mistake. Malign purpose was all I could think of, and I kept deathly quiet, awaiting the
                    would-be intruder's next move.After a time the cautious rattling ceased, and I heard the room to the north
                    entered with a pass key. Then the lock of the connecting door to my room was softly tried. The bolt held, of course, and I heard the floor creak as the prowler left the
                    room. After a moment there came another soft rattling, and I knew that the room to the
                    south of me was being entered. Again a furtive trying of a bolted connecting door, and again a receding
                    creaking. This time the creaking went along the hall and down the stairs, so I knew that
                    the prowler had realized the bolted condition of my doors and was giving up his
                    attempt for a time._The one thing to do was to get out of that hotel alive as quickly as I could,
                    and through some channel other than the front stairs and lobby!Rising softly and throwing my flashlight on the switch, I sought to light the
                    bulb over my bed in order to choose and pocket some belongings for a swift,
                    valiseless flight. Nothing, however, happened; and I saw that the power had been cut off. So, filling my pockets with the flashlight's aid, I put on my hat and tiptoed to
                    the windows to consider chances of descent. Despite the state's safety regulations there was no fire escape on this side of
                    the hotel, and I saw that my windows commanded only a sheer three-story drop to
                    the cobbled courtyard. On the right and left, however, some ancient brick business blocks abutted on
                    the hotel; their slant roofs coming up to a reasonable jumping distance from my
                    fourth-story level. To reach either of these lines of buildings I would have to be in a room two
                    doors from my own--in one case on the north and in the other case on the
                    south--and my mind instantly set to work calculating what chances I had of
                    making the transfer.First, I reinforced my own outer door by pushing the bureau against it--little by
                    little, in order to make a minimum of sound. Then, gathering from the grocery boy's map that the best route out of town was
                    southward, I glanced first at the connecting door on the south side of the
                    room. It was designed to open in my direction, hence I saw--after drawing the bolt and
                    finding other fastenings in place--it was not a favorable one for forcing. Accordingly abandoning it as a route, I cautiously moved the bedstead against it
                    to hamper any attack which might be made on it later from the next room. The door on the north was hung to open away from me, and this--though a test
                    proved it to be locked or bolted from the other side--I knew must be my
                    route. If I could gain the roofs of the buildings in Paine Street and descend
                    successfully to the ground level, I might perhaps dart through the courtyard and
                    the adjacent or opposite buildings to Washington or Bates--or else emerge in
                    Paine and edge around southward into Washington. In any case, I would aim to strike Washington somehow and get quickly out of the
                    Town Square region. My preference would be to avoid Paine, since the fire station there might be
                    open all night.I was irresolutely speculating on when I had better attack the northward door,
                    and on how I could least audibly manage it, when I noticed that the vague noises
                    underfoot had given place to a fresh and heavier creaking of the stairs. A wavering flicker of light showed through my transom, and the boards of the
                    corridor began to groan with a ponderous load. Muffled sounds of possible vocal origin approached, and at length a firm knock
                    came at my outer door.For a moment I simply held my breath and waited. Eternities seemed to elapse, and the nauseous fishy odor of my environment
                    seemed to mount suddenly and spectacularly. Then the knocking was repeated--continuously, and with growing insistence. I knew that the time for action had come, and forthwith drew the bolt of the
                    northward connecting door, bracing myself for the task of battering it open. The knocking waxed louder, and I hoped that its volume would cover the sound of
                    my efforts. At last beginning my attempt, I lunged again and again at the thin panelling
                    with my left shoulder, heedless of shock or pain.Finally the connecting door gave, but with such a crash that I knew those outside
                    must have heard. Instantly the outside knocking became a violent battering, while keys sounded
                    ominously in the hall doors of the rooms on both sides of me. Rushing through the newly opened connection, I succeeded in bolting the
                    northerly hall door before the lock could be turned; but even as I did so I
                    heard the hall door of the third room--the one from whose window I had hoped to
                    reach the roof below--being tried with a pass key.For an instant I felt absolute despair, since my trapping in a chamber with no
                    window egress seemed complete. Then, with a dazed automatism, I made for the next connecting door and performed
                    the blind motion of pushing at it in an effort to get through!Sheer fortunate chance gave me my reprieve--for the connecting door before me was
                    not only unlocked but actually ajar. In a second I was through, and had my right knee and shoulder against a hall
                    door which was visibly opening inward. My pressure took the opener off guard, for the thing shut as I pushed, so that I
                    could slip the well-conditioned bolt as I had done with the other door. As I gained this respite I heard the battering at the two other doors abate,
                    while a confused clatter came from the connecting door I had shielded with the
                    bedstead. Evidently the bulk of my assailants had entered the southerly room and were
                    massing in a lateral attack. But at the same moment a pass key sounded in the next door to the north, and I
                    knew that a nearer peril was at hand.The northward connecting door was wide open, but there was no time to think about
                    checking the already turning lock in the hall. All I could do was to shut and bolt the open connecting door, as well as its
                    mate on the opposite side--pushing a bedstead against the one and a bureau
                    against the other, and moving a washstand in front of the hall door. I must, I saw, trust to such makeshift barriers to shield me till I could get
                    out the window and on the roof of the Paine Street block. But even in this acute moment my chief horror was something apart from the
                    immediate weakness of my defenses. I was shuddering because not one of my pursuers, despite some hideous pantings,
                    gruntings, and subdued barkings at odd intervals, was uttering an intelligible
                    vocal sound!As I moved the furniture and rushed toward the windows I heard a frightful
                    scurrying along the corridor toward the room north of me, and perceived that the
                    southward battering had ceased. Plainly, most of my opponents were about to concentrate against the feeble
                    connecting door which they knew must open directly on me. Outside, the moon played on the ridge-pole of the block below, and I saw that
                    the jump would be desperately hazardous because of the steep surface on which I
                    must land.The clatter at the northerly connecting door was now terrific, and I saw that the
                    weak panelling was beginning to splinter. Obviously, the besiegers had brought some ponderous object into play as a
                    battering-ram. The bedstead, however, still held firm; so that I had at least a faint chance of
                    making good my escape. As I opened the window I noticed that it was flanked by heavy velour draperies
                    suspended from a pole by brass rings, and also that there was a large projecting
                    catch for the shutters on the exterior. Seeing a possible means of avoiding the dangerous jump, I yanked at the hangings
                    and brought them down, pole and all; then quickly hooking two of the rings in
                    the shutter catch and flinging the drapery outside. The heavy folds reached fully to the abutting roof, and I saw that the rings and
                    catch would be likely to bear my weight. So, climbing out of the window and down the improvised rope ladder, I left
                    behind me forever the morbid and horror-infested fabric of the Gilman House.I landed safely on the loose slates of the steep roof, and succeeded in gaining
                    the gaping black skylight without a slip. The place inside was ghoulish-looking, but I was past minding such impressions
                    and made at once for the staircase revealed by my flashlight--after a hasty
                    glance at my watch, which showed the hour to be 2 A.M. The steps creaked, but seemed tolerably sound; and I raced down past a barnlike
                    second story to the ground floor. The desolation was complete, and only echoes answered my footfalls.The hallway inside was black, and when I reached the opposite end I saw that the
                    street door was wedged immovably shut. Resolved to try another building, I groped my way toward the courtyard, but
                    stopped short when close to the doorway.For out of an opened door in the Gilman House a large crowd of doubtful shapes
                    was pouring--lanterns bobbing in the darkness, and horrible croaking voices
                    exchanging low cries in what was certainly not English. Their features were indistinguishable, but their crouching, shambling gait was
                    abominably repellent. And worst of all, I perceived that one figure was strangely robed, and
                    unmistakably surmounted by a tall tiara of a design altogether too familiar. Again groping toward the street, I opened a door off the hall and came upon an
                    empty room with closely shuttered but sashless windows. Fumbling in the rays of my flashlight, I found I could open the shutters; and in
                    another moment had climbed outside and was carefully closing the aperture in its
                    original manner.I walked rapidly, softly, and close to the ruined houses. At Bates Street I drew into a yawning vestibule while two shambling figures
                    crossed in front of me, but was soon on my way again and approaching the open
                    space where Eliot Street obliquely crosses Washington at the intersection of
                    South. Though I had never seen this space, it had looked dangerous to me on the grocery
                    youth's map; since the moonlight would have free play there. There was no use trying to evade it, for any alternative course would involve
                    detours of possibly disastrous visibility and delaying effect. The only thing to do was to cross it boldly and openly; imitating the typical
                    shamble of the Innsmouth folk as best I could, and trusting that no one--or at
                    least no pursuer of mine--would be there.Just how fully the pursuit was organized--and indeed, just what its purpose might
                    be--I could form no idea. There seemed to be unusual activity in the town, but I judged that the news of
                    my escape from the Gilman had not yet spread. The open space was, as I had expected, strongly moonlit. But my progress was unimpeded, and no fresh sound arose to hint that I had been
                    spied. Glancing about me, I involuntarily let my pace slacken for a second to take in
                    the sight of the sea, gorgeous in the burning moonlight at the street's end. Far out beyond the breakwater was the dim, dark line of Devil Reef.Then, without warning, I saw the intermittent flashes of light on the distant
                    reef. My muscles tightened for panic flight, held in only by a certain unconscious
                    caution and half-hypnotic fascination. And to make matters worse, there now flashed forth from the lofty cupola of the
                    Gilman House, which loomed up to the northeast behind me, a series of analogous
                    though differently spaced gleams which could be nothing less than an answering
                    signal.I now bent to the left around the ruinous green; still gazing toward the ocean as
                    it blazed in the spectral summer moonlight, and watching the cryptical flashing
                    of those nameless, unexplainable beacons.It was then that the most horrible impression of all was borne in upon me--the
                    impression which destroyed my last vestige of self-control and sent me running
                    frantically southward past the yawning black doorways and fishily staring
                    windows of that deserted nightmare street. For at a closer glance I saw that the moonlit waters between the reef and the
                    shore were far from empty. They were alive with a teeming horde of shapes swimming inward toward the
                    town!My frantic running ceased before I had covered a block, for at my left I began to
                    hear something like the hue and cry of organized pursuit. There were footsteps and guttural sounds, and a rattling motor wheezed south
                    along Federal Street. In a second all my plans were utterly changed--for if the southward highway were
                    blocked ahead of me, I must clearly find another egress from Innsmouth. I paused and drew into a gaping doorway, reflecting how lucky I was to have left
                    the moonlit open space before these pursuers came down the parallel street.Then I thought of the abandoned railway to Rowley, whose solid line of ballasted,
                    weed-grown earth still stretched off to the northwest from the crumbling station
                    on the edge of the river gorge. There was just a chance that the townsfolk would not think of that!Drawing inside the hall of my deserted shelter, I once more consulted the grocery
                    boy's map with the aid of the flashlight. The immediate problem was how to reach the ancient railway; and I now saw that
                    the safest course was ahead to Babson Street, then west to Lafayette--there
                    edging around but not crossing an open space homologous to the one I had
                    traversed--and subsequently back northward and westward in zigzagging line
                    through Lafayette, Bates, Adams, and Banks Streets--the latter skirting the
                    river gorge--to the abandoned and dilapidated station I had seen from my
                    window. My reason for going ahead to Babson was that I wished neither to re-cross the
                    earlier open space nor to begin my westward course along a cross street as broad
                    as South. I crossed the street to the right-hand side in order to edge around into Babson
                    as inconspicuously as possible.In Babson Street I clung as closely as possible to the sagging, uneven buildings;
                    twice pausing in a doorway as the noises behind me momentarily increased. The open space ahead shone wide and desolate under the moon, but my route would
                    not force me to cross it. During my second pause I began to detect a fresh distribution of the vague
                    sounds; and upon looking cautiously out from cover beheld a motor car darting
                    across the open space, bound outward along Eliot Street.As I watched--choked by a sudden rise in the fishy odor after a short
                    abatement--I saw a band of uncouth, crouching shapes loping and shambling in the
                    same direction; and knew that this must be the party guarding the Ipswich road,
                    since that highway forms an extension of Eliot Street. Two of the figures I glimpsed were in voluminous robes, and one wore a peaked
                    diadem which glistened whitely in the moonlight. The gait of this figure was so odd that it sent a chill through me--for it
                    seemed to me the creature was almost _hopping_.When the last of the band was out of sight I resumed my progress; darting around
                    the corner into Lafayette Street, and crossing Eliot very hurriedly lest
                    stragglers of the party be still advancing along that thoroughfare. I did hear some croaking and clattering sounds far off toward Town Square, but
                    accomplished the passage without disaster. My greatest dread was in re-crossing broad and moonlit South Street--with its
                    seaward view--and I had to nerve myself for the ordeal. Someone might easily be looking, and possible Eliot Street stragglers could not
                    fail to glimpse me from either of two points. At the last moment I decided I had better slacken my trot and make the crossing
                    as before in the shambling gait of an average Innsmouth native.I had not quite crossed the street when I heard a muttering band advancing along
                    Washington from the north. As they reached the broad open space where I had had my first disquieting
                    glimpse of the moonlit water I could see them plainly only a block away--and was
                    horrified by the bestial abnormality of their faces and the dog-like
                    sub-humanness of their crouching gait. One man moved in a positively simian way, with long arms frequently touching the
                    ground; while another figure--robed and tiaraed--seemed to progress in an almost
                    hopping fashion. I judged this party to be the one I had seen in the Gilman's courtyard--the one,
                    therefore, most closely on my trail. As some of the figures turned to look in my direction I was transfixed with
                    fright, yet managed to preserve the casual, shambling gait I had assumed. To this day I do not know whether they saw me or not. If they did, my stratagem must have deceived them, for they passed on across the
                    moonlit space without varying their course--meanwhile croaking and jabbering in
                    some hateful guttural patois I could not identify.Once more in shadow, I resumed my former dog-trot past the leaning and decrepit
                    houses that stared blankly into the night. Having crossed to the western sidewalk I rounded the nearest corner into Bates
                    Street, where I kept close to the buildings on the southern side. At last I saw the ancient arcaded station--or what was left of it--and made
                    directly for the tracks that started from its farther end.The rails were rusty but mainly intact, and not more than half the ties had
                    rotted away. Walking or running on such a surface was very difficult; but I did my best, and
                    on the whole made very fair time. For some distance the line kept on along the gorge's brink, but at length I
                    reached the long covered bridge where it crossed the chasm at a dizzy
                    height. The condition of this bridge would determine my next step. If humanly possible, I would use it; if not, I would have to risk more street
                    wandering and take the nearest intact highway bridge.The vast, barnlike length of the old bridge gleamed spectrally in the moonlight
                    and I saw that the ties were safe for at least a few feet within. Entering, I began to use my flashlight, and was almost knocked down by the cloud
                    of bats that flapped past me. About halfway across there was a perilous gap in the ties which I feared for a
                    moment would halt me; but in the end I risked a desperate jump which fortunately
                    succeeded.I was glad to see the moonlight again when I emerged from that macabre
                    tunnel. The old tracks crossed River Street at a grade, and at once veered off into a
                    region increasingly rural and with less and less of Innsmouth's abhorrent fishy
                    odor. Here the dense growth of weeds and briers hindered me and cruelly tore my
                    clothes, but I was none the less glad that they were there to give me
                    concealment in case of peril. I knew that much of my route must be visible from the Rowley road.The marshy region began very shortly, with the single track on a low, grassy
                    embankment. Then came a sort of island of higher ground, where the line passed through a
                    shallow open cut choked with bushes and brambles. I was very glad of this partial shelter, since at this point the Rowley road was
                    uncomfortably near according to my window view.Just before entering the cut I glanced behind me, but saw no pursuer. The ancient spires and roofs of decaying Innsmouth gleamed lovely and ethereal
                    in the magic yellow moonlight, and I thought of how they must have looked in the
                    old days before the shadow fell. Then, as my gaze circled inland from the town, something less tranquil arrested
                    my notice and held me immobile for a second.What I saw--or fancied I saw--was a disturbing suggestion of undulant motion far
                    to the south; a suggestion which made me conclude that a very large horde must
                    be pouring out of the city along the level Ipswich road. The distance was great, and I could distinguish nothing in detail; but I did not
                    at all like the look of that moving column.All sorts of unpleasant conjectures crossed my mind. I thought of those very extreme Innsmouth types said to be hidden in crumbling,
                    centuried warrens near the waterfront. I thought, too, of those nameless swimmers I had seen. Counting the parties so far glimpsed, as well as those presumably covering other
                    roads, the number of my pursuers must be strangely large for a town as
                    depopulated as Innsmouth.Who were they? Why were they here? And if such a column of them was scouring the Ipswich road, would the patrols on
                    the other roads be likewise augmented?I had entered the brush-grown cut and was struggling along at a very slow pace
                    when that damnable fishy odor again waxed dominant. There were sounds, too--a kind of wholesale, colossal flopping or pattering
                    which somehow called up images of the most detestable sort.And then both stench and sounds grew stronger, so that I paused shivering and
                    grateful for the cut's protection. It was here, I recalled, that the Rowley road drew so close to the old railway
                    before crossing westward and diverging. Something was coming along that road, and I must lie low till its passage and
                    vanishment in the distance. Crouched in the bushes of that sandy cleft I felt reasonably safe, even though I
                    knew the searchers would have to cross the track in front of me not much more
                    than a hundred yards away. I would be able to see them, but they could not, except by a malign miracle, see
                    me.All at once I began dreading to look at them as they passed. I saw the close moonlit space where they would surge by, and had curious
                    thoughts about the irredeemable pollution of that space. They would perhaps be the worst of all Innsmouth types--something one would not
                    care to remember.The stench waxed overpowering, and the noises swelled to a bestial babel of
                    croaking, baying, and barking, without the least suggestion of human speech. Were these indeed the voices of my pursuers? That flopping or pattering was monstrous--I could not look upon the degenerate
                    creatures responsible for it. I would keep my eyes shut till the sounds receded toward the west. The horde was very close now--the air foul with their hoarse snarlings, and the
                    ground almost shaking with their alien-rhythmed footfalls. My breath nearly ceased to come, and I put every ounce of will-power into the
                    task of holding my eyelids down.I am not even yet willing to say whether what followed was a hideous actuality or
                    only a nightmare hallucination. The later action of the government, after my frantic appeals, would tend to
                    confirm it as a monstrous truth; but could not an hallucination have been
                    repeated under the quasi-hypnotic spell of that ancient, haunted, and shadowed
                    town?But I must try to tell what I thought I saw that night under the mocking yellow
                    moon--saw surging and hopping down the Rowley road in plain sight in front of me
                    as I crouched among the wild brambles of that desolate railway cut. Of course my resolution to keep my eyes shut had failed. It was foredoomed to failure--for who could crouch blindly while a legion of
                    croaking, baying entities of unknown source flopped noisomely past, scarcely
                    more than a hundred yards away?For I knew that a long section of them must be plainly in sight where the sides
                    of the cut flattened out and the road crossed the track--and I could no longer
                    keep myself from sampling whatever horror that leering yellow moon might have to
                    show.It was the end, for whatever remains to me of life on the surface of this earth,
                    of every vestige of mental peace and confidence in the integrity of nature and
                    of the human mind. Can it be possible that this planet has actually spawned such things; that human
                    eyes have truly seen, as objective flesh, what man has hitherto known only in
                    febrile phantasy and tenuous legend?And yet I saw them in a limitless stream--flopping, hopping, croaking,
                    bleating--surging inhumanly through the spectral moonlight in a grotesque,
                    malignant saraband of fantastic nightmare. And some of them had tall
                    tiaras of that nameless whitish-gold metal ... and some were
                    strangely robed ... and one, who led the way, was clad in a
                    ghoulishly humped black coat and striped trousers, and had a man's felt hat
                    perched on the shapeless thing that answered for a head...I think their predominant color was a grayish-green, though they had white
                    bellies. They were mostly shiny and slippery, but the ridges of their backs were
                    scaly. Their forms vaguely suggested the anthropoid, while their heads were the heads
                    of fish, with prodigious bulging eyes that never closed. At the sides of their necks were palpitating gills, and their long paws were
                    webbed. They hopped irregularly, sometimes on two legs and sometimes on four. I was somehow glad that they had no more than four limbs. Their croaking, baying voices, clearly used for articulate speech, held all the
                    dark shades of expression which their staring faces lacked.But for all of their monstrousness they were not unfamiliar to me. I knew too well what they must be--for was not the memory of that evil tiara at
                    Newburyport still fresh? They were the blasphemous fish-frogs of the nameless design--living and
                    horrible--and as I saw them I knew also of what that humped, tiaraed priest in
                    the black church basement had so fearsomely reminded me. Their number was past guessing. It seemed to me that there were limitless swarms of them--and certainly my
                    momentary glimpse could have shown only the least fraction. In another instant everything was blotted out by a merciful fit of fainting; the
                    first I had ever had.It was a gentle daylight rain that awaked me from my stupor in the brush-grown
                    railway cut, and when I staggered out to the roadway ahead I saw no trace of any
                    prints in the fresh mud. Innsmouth's ruined roofs and toppling steeples loomed up grayly toward the
                    southeast, but not a living creature did I spy in all the desolate salt marshes
                    around. My watch was still going, and told me that the hour was past noon.The reality of what I had been through was highly uncertain in my mind, but I
                    felt that something hideous lay in the background. I must get away from evil-shadowed Innsmouth--and accordingly I began to test my
                    cramped, wearied powers of locomotion. Despite weakness, hunger, horror, and bewilderment I found myself after a time
                    able to walk; so started slowly along the muddy road to Rowley. Before evening I was in the village, getting a meal and providing myself with
                    presentable clothes. I caught the night train to Arkham, and the next day talked long and earnestly
                    with government officials there; a process I later repeated in Boston. With the main result of these colloquies the public is now familiar--and I wish,
                    for normality's sake, there were nothing more to tell. Perhaps it is madness that is overtaking me--yet perhaps a greater horror--or a
                    greater marvel--is reaching out.I dared not look for that piece of strange jewelry said to be in the Miskatonic
                    University Museum. I did, however, improve my stay in Arkham by collecting some genealogical notes
                    I had long wished to possess; very rough and hasty data, it is true, but capable
                    of good use later on when I might have time to collate and codify them. The curator of the historical society there--Mr. E. Lapham Peabody--was very courteous about assisting me, and expressed unusual
                    interest when I told him I was a grandson of Eliza Orne of Arkham, who was born
                    in 1867 and had married James Williamson of Ohio at the age of seventeen.It seemed that a maternal uncle of mine had been there many years before on a
                    quest much like my own; and that my grandmother's family was a topic of some
                    local curiosity. There had, Mr. Peabody said, been considerable discussion about the marriage of her father,
                    Benjamin Orne, just after the Civil War; since the ancestry of the bride was
                    peculiarly puzzling. That bride was understood to have been an orphaned Marsh of New Hampshire--a
                    cousin of the Essex County Marshes--but her education had been in France and she
                    knew very little of her family. A guardian had deposited funds in a Boston bank to maintain her and her French
                    governess; but that guardian's name was unfamiliar to Arkham people, and in time
                    he dropped out of sight, so that the governess assumed his role by court
                    appointment. The French-woman--now long dead--was very taciturn, and there were those who
                    said she could have told more than she did.But the most baffling thing was the inability of anyone to place the recorded
                    parents of the young woman--Enoch and Lydia (Meserve) Marsh--among the known
                    families of New Hampshire. Possibly, many suggested, she was the natural daughter of some Marsh of
                    prominence--she certainly had the true Marsh eyes. Most of the puzzling was done after her early death, which took place at the
                    birth of my grandmother--her only child. Having formed some disagreeable impressions connected with the name of Marsh, I
                    did not welcome the news that it belonged on my own ancestral tree; nor was I
                    pleased by Mr. Peabody's suggestion that I had the true Marsh eyes myself. However, I was grateful for data which I knew would prove valuable; and took
                    copious notes and lists of book references regarding the well-documented Orne
                    family.I went directly home to Toledo from Boston, and later spent a month at Maumee
                    recuperating from my ordeal. In September I entered Oberlin for my final year, and from then till the next
                    June was busy with studies and other wholesome activities--reminded of the
                    bygone terror only by occasional official visits from government men in
                    connection with the campaign which my pleas and evidence had started. Around the middle of July--just a year after the Innsmouth experience--I spent a
                    week with my late mother's family in Cleveland; checking some of my new
                    genealogical data with the various notes, traditions, and bits of heirloom
                    material in existence there, and seeing what kind of a connected chart I could
                    construct.I did not exactly relish this task, for the atmosphere of the Williamson home had
                    always depressed me. There was a strain of morbidity there, and my mother had never encouraged my
                    visiting her parents as a child, although she always welcomed her father when he
                    came to Toledo. My Arkham-born grandmother had seemed strange and almost terrifying to me, and I
                    do not think I grieved when she disappeared. I was eight years old then, and it was said that she had wandered off in grief
                    after the suicide of my uncle Douglas, her eldest son. He had shot himself after a trip to New England--the same trip, no doubt, which
                    had caused him to be recalled at the Arkham Historical Society.This uncle had resembled her, and I had never liked him either. Something about the staring, unwinking expression of both of them had given me a
                    vague, unaccountable uneasiness. My mother and uncle Walter had not looked like that. They were like their father, though poor little cousin Lawrence--Walter's
                    son--had been an almost perfect duplicate of his grandmother before his
                    condition took him to the permanent seclusion of a sanitarium at Canton. I had not seen him in four years, but my uncle once implied that his state, both
                    mental and physical, was very bad. This worry had probably been a major cause of his mother's death two years
                    before.My grandfather and his widowered son Walter now comprised the Cleveland
                    household, but the memory of older times hung thickly over it. I still disliked the place, and tried to get my researches done as quickly as
                    possible. Williamson records and traditions were supplied in abundance by my grandfather;
                    though for Orne material I had to depend on my uncle Walter, who put at my
                    disposal the contents of all his files, including notes, letters, cuttings,
                    heirlooms, photographs, and miniatures.It was in going over the letters and pictures on the Orne side that I began to
                    acquire a kind of terror of my own ancestry. As I have said, my grandmother and uncle Douglas had always disturbed me. Now, years after their passing, I gazed at their pictured faces with a
                    measurably heightened feeling of repulsion and alienation. I could not at first understand the change, but gradually a horrible sort of
                    _comparison_ began to obtrude itself on my unconscious mind despite the steady
                    refusal of my consciousness to admit even the least suspicion of it. It was clear that the typical expression of these faces now suggested something
                    it had not suggested before--something which would bring stark panic if too
                    openly thought of.But the worst shock came when my uncle showed me the Orne jewelry in a downtown
                    safe-deposit vault. Some of the items were delicate and inspiring enough, but there was one box of
                    strange old pieces descended from my mysterious great-grandmother which my uncle
                    was almost reluctant to produce. They were, he said, of very grotesque and almost repulsive design.As my uncle began slowly and grudgingly to unwrap the things, he urged me not to
                    be shocked by the strangeness and frequent hideousness of the designs. There were two armlets, a tiara, and a kind of pectoral; the latter having in
                    high relief certain figures of almost unbearable extravagance.He seemed to expect some demonstration when the first piece--the tiara--became
                    visible, but I doubt if he expected quite what actually happened. I did not expect it, either, for I thought I was thoroughly forewarned regarding
                    what the jewelry would turn out to be. What I did was to faint silently away just as I had done in that brier-choked
                    railway cut a year before.From that day on my life has been a nightmare of brooding and apprehension, nor
                    do I know how much is hideous truth and how much madness. My great-grandmother had been a Marsh of unknown source whose husband lived in
                    Arkham--and did not old Zadok say that the daughter of Obed Marsh by a monstrous
                    mother was married to an Arkham man through a trick? What was it the ancient toper had muttered about the likeness of my eyes to
                    Captain Obed's? In Arkham, too, the curator had told me I had the true Marsh eyes. Was Obed Marsh my own great-great-grandfather? Who--or _what_--then, was my great-great-grandmother? But perhaps this was all madness. Those whitish-gold ornaments might easily have been bought from some Innsmouth
                    sailor by the father of my great-grandmother, whoever he was. And that look in the staring-eyed faces of my grandmother and self-slain uncle
                    might be sheer fancy, bolstered up by the Innsmouth shadow which had so darkly
                    colored my imagination. But why had my uncle killed himself after an ancestral quest in New England?For more than two years I fought off these reflections with partial success. My father secured me a place in an insurance office, and I buried myself in
                    routine as deeply as possible. In the winter of 1930-31, however, the dreams began. They were very sparse and insidious at first, but increased in frequency and
                    vividness as the weeks went by. Great watery spaces opened out before me, and I seemed to wander through titanic
                    sunken porticos and labyrinths of weedy cyclopean walls and grotesque fishes as
                    my companions. Then the _other shapes_ began to appear, filling me with nameless horror the
                    moment I awoke. But during the dreams they did not horrify me at all--I was one with them;
                    wearing their unhuman trappings, treading their aqueous ways, and praying
                    monstrously at their evil sea-bottom temples.There was much more than I could remember, but even what I did remember each
                    morning would be enough to stamp me as a madman or a genius if ever I dared
                    write it down. Some frightful influence, I felt, was seeking gradually to drag me out of the
                    sane world of wholesome life into unnameable abysses of blackness and alienage;
                    and the process told heavily on me. My health and appearance grew steadily worse, till finally I was forced to give
                    up my position and adopt the static, secluded life of an invalid. Some odd nervous affliction had me in its grip, and I found myself at times
                    almost unable to shut my eyes.It was then that I began to study the mirror with mounting alarm. The slow ravages of disease are not pleasant to watch, but in my case there was
                    something subtler and more puzzling in the background. My father seemed to notice it, too, for he began looking at me curiously and
                    almost affrightedly. What was taking place in me? Could it be that I was coming to resemble my grandmother and uncle Douglas?One night I had a frightful dream in which I met my grandmother under the
                    sea. She lived in a phosphorescent palace of many terraces, with gardens of strange
                    leprous corals and grotesque brachiate efflorescences, and welcomed me with a
                    warmth that may have been sardonic. She had changed--as those who take to the water change--and told me she had
                    never died. Instead, she had gone to a spot her dead son had learned about, and had leaped
                    to a realm whose wonders--destined for him as well--he had spurned with a
                    smoking pistol. This was to be my realm, too--I could not escape it. I would never die, but would live with those who had lived since before man ever
                    walked the earth.I met also that which had been her grandmother. For eighty thousand years Pth'thya-l'yi had lived in Y'ha-nthlei, and thither
                    she had gone back after Obed Marsh was dead. Y'ha-nthlei was not destroyed when the upper-earth men shot death into the
                    sea. It was hurt, but not destroyed. The Deep Ones could never be destroyed, even though the palaeogean magic of the
                    forgotten Old Ones might sometimes check them. For the present they would rest; but some day, if they remembered, they would
                    rise again for the tribute Great Cthulhu craved. It would be a city greater than Innsmouth next time. They had planned to spread, and had brought up that which would help them, but
                    now they must wait once more. For bringing the upper-earth men's death I must do a penance, but that would not
                    be heavy. This was the dream in which I saw a _shoggoth_ for the first time, and the sight
                    set me awake in a frenzy of screaming. That morning the mirror definitely told me I had acquired _the Innsmouth
                    look_.So far I have not shot myself as my uncle Douglas did. I bought an automatic and almost took the step, but certain dreams deterred
                    me. The tense extremes of horror are lessening, and I feel queerly drawn toward the
                    unknown sea-deeps instead of fearing them. I hear and do strange things in sleep, and awake with a kind of exaltation
                    instead of terror. I do not believe I need to wait for the full change as most have waited. If I did, my father would probably shut me up in a sanitarium as my poor little
                    cousin is shut up. Stupendous and unheard-of splendors await me below, and I shall seek them
                    soon. _I-R'lyeh! Cthulhu fhtagn! I! I!_ No, I shall not shoot myself--I cannot be made to shoot myself!I shall plan my cousin's escape from that Canton madhouse, and together we shall
                    go to marvel-shadowed Innsmouth. We shall swim out to that brooding reef in the sea and dive down through black
                    abysses to cyclopean and many-columned Y'ha-nthlei, and in that lair of the Deep
                    Ones we shall dwell amidst wonder and glory forever.