ContentsssTHE PURLOINED LETTER
 THE THOUSAND-AND-SECOND TALE OF SCHEHERAZADE
 A DESCENT INTO THE MAELSTROM.
 VON KEMPELEN AND HIS DISCOVERY
 MESMERIC REVELATION
 THE FACTS IN THE CASE OF M. VALDEMAR
 THE BLACK CAT.
 THE FALL OF THE HOUSE OF USHER
 SILENCE—A FABLE
 THE MASQUE OF THE RED DEATH.
 THE CASK OF AMONTILLADO.
 THE IMP OF THE PERVERSE
 THE ISLAND OF THE FAY
 THE ASSIGNATION
 THE PIT AND THE PENDULUM
 THE PREMATURE BURIAL
 THE DOMAIN OF ARNHEIM
 LANDOR’S COTTAGE
 WILLIAM WILSO
 THE TELL-TALE HEART.
 BERENICE
 ELEONORAssTHE PURLOINED LETTERssNil sapientiæ odiosius acumine nimio.—_Seneca_.

At Paris, just after dark one gusty evening in the autumn of 18-,ssI was enjoying the twofold luxury of meditation and a meerschaum,sin company with my friend C. Auguste Dupin, in his little backsslibrary, or book-closet, _au troisième_, No. 33, _Rue Dunôt,ssFaubourg St. Germain_. For one hour at least we had maintained assprofound silence; while each, to any casual observer, might havessseemed intently and exclusively occupied with the curling eddiesssof smoke that oppressed the atmosphere of the chamber. Forssmyself, however, I was mentally discussing certain topics whichsshad formed matter for conversation between us at an earlierssperiod of the evening; I mean the affair of the Rue Morgue, andssthe mystery attending the murder of Marie Rogêt. I looked uponssit, therefore, as something of a coincidence, when the door ofssour apartment was thrown open and admitted our old acquaintance,ssMonsieur G——, the Prefect of the Parisian police.ssWe gave him a hearty welcome; for there was nearly half as muchssof the entertaining as of the contemptible about the man, and wesshad not seen him for several years. We had been sitting in thessdark, and Dupin now arose for the purpose of lighting a lamp, butsssat down again, without doing so, upon G.‘s saying that he hadsscalled to consult us, or rather to ask the opinion of my friend,ssabout some official business which had occasioned a great deal ofsstrouble.ss“If it is any point requiring reflection,” observed Dupin, as hessforebore to enkindle the wick, “we shall examine it to bettersspurpose in the dark.”ss“That is another of your odd notions,” said the Prefect, who hadssa fashion of calling every thing “odd” that was beyond hissscomprehension, and thus lived amid an absolute legion ofss“oddities.”ss“Very true,” said Dupin, as he supplied his visitor with a pipe,ssand rolled towards him a comfortable chair.ss“And what is the difficulty now?” I asked. “Nothing more in thessassassination way, I hope?”ss“Oh no; nothing of that nature. The fact is, the business is verysssimple indeed, and I make no doubt that we can manage itsssufficiently well ourselves; but then I thought Dupin would likessto hear the details of it, because it is so excessively odd.”ss“Simple and odd,” said Dupin.ss“Why, yes; and not exactly that, either. The fact is, we have allssbeen a good deal puzzled because the affair is so simple, and yetssbaffles us altogether.”ss“Perhaps it is the very simplicity of the thing which puts you atssfault,” said my friend.ss“What nonsense you do talk!” replied the Prefect, laughingssheartily.ss“Perhaps the mystery is a little too plain,” said Dupin.ss“Oh, good heavens! who ever heard of such an idea?”ss“A little too self-evident.”ss“Ha! ha! ha—ha! ha! ha!—ho! ho! ho!” roared our visitor,ssprofoundly amused, “oh, Dupin, you will be the death of me yet!”ss“And what, after all, is the matter on hand?” I asked.ss“Why, I will tell you,” replied the Prefect, as he gave a long,sssteady and contemplative puff, and settled himself in his chair.ss“I will tell you in a few words; but, before I begin, let messcaution you that this is an affair demanding the greatestsssecrecy, and that I should most probably lose the position I nowsshold, were it known that I confided it to any one.”ss“Proceed,” said I.ss“Or not,” said Dupin.ss“Well, then; I have received personal information, from a verysshigh quarter, that a certain document of the last importance hasssbeen purloined from the royal apartments. The individual whosspurloined it is known; this beyond a doubt; he was seen to takessit. It is known, also, that it still remains in his possession.”ss“How is this known?” asked Dupin.ss“It is clearly inferred,” replied the Prefect, “from the naturessof the document, and from the non-appearance of certain resultssswhich would at once arise from its passing out of the robber’ssspossession; that is to say, from his employing it as he mustssdesign in the end to employ it.”ss“Be a little more explicit,” I said.ss“Well, I may venture so far as to say that the paper gives itsssholder a certain power in a certain quarter where such power isssimmensely valuable.” The Prefect was fond of the cant ofssdiplomacy.ss“Still I do not quite understand,” said Dupin.ss“No? Well; the disclosure of the document to a third person, whossshall be nameless, would bring in question the honor of asspersonage of most exalted station; and this fact gives the holderssof the document an ascendancy over the illustrious personagesswhose honor and peace are so jeopardized.”ss“But this ascendancy,” I interposed, “would depend upon thessrobber’s knowledge of the loser’s knowledge of the robber. Whosswould dare—”ss“The thief,” said G., “is the Minister D——, who dares all things,ssthose unbecoming as well as those becoming a man. The method ofssthe theft was not less ingenious than bold. The document inssquestion—a letter, to be frank—had been received by the personagessrobbed while alone in the royal boudoir. During its perusal shesswas suddenly interrupted by the entrance of the other exaltedsspersonage from whom especially it was her wish to conceal it.ssAfter a hurried and vain endeavor to thrust it in a drawer, shesswas forced to place it, open as it was, upon a table. Thessaddress, however, was uppermost, and, the contents thusssunexposed, the letter escaped notice. At this juncture enters thessMinister D——. His lynx eye immediately perceives the paper,ssrecognises the handwriting of the address, observes the confusionssof the personage addressed, and fathoms her secret. After somessbusiness transactions, hurried through in his ordinary manner, hessproduces a letter somewhat similar to the one in question, opensssit, pretends to read it, and then places it in closessjuxtaposition to the other. Again he converses, for some fifteenssminutes, upon the public affairs. At length, in taking leave, hesstakes also from the table the letter to which he had no claim.ssIts rightful owner saw, but, of course, dared not call attentionssto the act, in the presence of the third personage who stood atssher elbow. The minister decamped; leaving his own letter—one ofssno importance—upon the table.”ss“Here, then,” said Dupin to me, “you have precisely what youssdemand to make the ascendancy complete—the robber’s knowledge ofssthe loser’s knowledge of the robber.”ss“Yes,” replied the Prefect; “and the power thus attained has, forsssome months past, been wielded, for political purposes, to a veryssdangerous extent. The personage robbed is more thoroughlyssconvinced, every day, of the necessity of reclaiming her letter.ssBut this, of course, cannot be done openly. In fine, driven tossdespair, she has committed the matter to me.”ss“Than whom,” said Dupin, amid a perfect whirlwind of smoke, “nossmore sagacious agent could, I suppose, be desired, or evenssimagined.”ss“You flatter me,” replied the Prefect; “but it is possible thatsssome such opinion may have been entertained.”ss“It is clear,” said I, “as you observe, that the letter is stillssin possession of the minister; since it is this possession, andssnot any employment of the letter, which bestows the power. Withssthe employment the power departs.”ss“True,” said G.; “and upon this conviction I proceeded. My firstsscare was to make thorough search of the minister’s hotel; andsshere my chief embarrassment lay in the necessity of searchingsswithout his knowledge. Beyond all things, I have been warned ofssthe danger which would result from giving him reason to suspectssour design.”ss“But,” said I, “you are quite au fait in these investigations.ssThe Parisian police have done this thing often before.”ss“Oh, yes; and for this reason I did not despair. The habits ofssthe minister gave me, too, a great advantage. He is frequentlyssabsent from home all night. His servants are by no meansssnumerous. They sleep at a distance from their master’s apartment,ssand, being chiefly Neapolitans, are readily made drunk. I havesskeys, as you know, with which I can open any chamber or cabinetssin Paris. For three months a night has not passed, during thessgreater part of which I have not been engaged, personally, inssransacking the D—— Hotel. My honor is interested, and, to mentionssa great secret, the reward is enormous. So I did not abandon thesssearch until I had become fully satisfied that the thief is assmore astute man than myself. I fancy that I have investigatedssevery nook and corner of the premises in which it is possiblessthat the paper can be concealed.”ss“But is it not possible,” I suggested, “that although the letterssmay be in possession of the minister, as it unquestionably is, hessmay have concealed it elsewhere than upon his own premises?”ss“This is barely possible,” said Dupin. “The present peculiarsscondition of affairs at court, and especially of those intriguesssin which D—— is known to be involved, would render the instantssavailability of the document—its susceptibility of being producedssat a moment’s notice—a point of nearly equal importance with itssspossession.”ss“Its susceptibility of being produced?” said I.ss“That is to say, of being destroyed,” said Dupin.ss“True,” I observed; “the paper is clearly then upon the premises.ssAs for its being upon the person of the minister, we may considerssthat as out of the question.”ss“Entirely,” said the Prefect. “He has been twice waylaid, as ifssby footpads, and his person rigorously searched under my ownssinspection.”ss“You might have spared yourself this trouble,” said Dupin. “D——,ssI presume, is not altogether a fool, and, if not, must havessanticipated these waylayings, as a matter of course.”ss“Not altogether a fool,” said G., “but then he’s a poet, which Isstake to be only one remove from a fool.”ss“True,” said Dupin, after a long and thoughtful whiff from hisssmeerschaum, “although I have been guilty of certain doggrelssmyself.”ss“Suppose you detail,” said I, “the particulars of your search.”ss“Why the fact is, we took our time, and we searched _everywhere_.ssI have had long experience in these affairs. I took the entiressbuilding, room by room; devoting the nights of a whole week tosseach. We examined, first, the furniture of each apartment. Wessopened every possible drawer; and I presume you know that, to assproperly trained police agent, such a thing as a secret drawer isssimpossible. Any man is a dolt who permits a ‘secret’ drawer tossescape him in a search of this kind. The thing is so plain. Theressis a certain amount of bulk—of space—to be accounted for in everysscabinet. Then we have accurate rules. The fiftieth part of a linesscould not escape us. After the cabinets we took the chairs. Thesscushions we probed with the fine long needles you have seen messemploy. From the tables we removed the tops.”ss“Why so?”ss“Sometimes the top of a table, or other similarly arranged piecessof furniture, is removed by the person wishing to conceal anssarticle; then the leg is excavated, the article deposited withinssthe cavity, and the top replaced. The bottoms and tops ofssbedposts are employed in the same way.”ss“But could not the cavity be detected by sounding?” I asked.ss“By no means, if, when the article is deposited, a sufficientsswadding of cotton be placed around it. Besides, in our case, wesswere obliged to proceed without noise.”ss“But you could not have removed—you could not have taken tosspieces all articles of furniture in which it would have beensspossible to make a deposit in the manner you mention. A letterssmay be compressed into a thin spiral roll, not differing much inssshape or bulk from a large knitting-needle, and in this form itssmight be inserted into the rung of a chair, for example. You didssnot take to pieces all the chairs?”ss“Certainly not; but we did better—we examined the rungs of everysschair in the hotel, and, indeed the jointings of everyssdescription of furniture, by the aid of a most powerfulssmicroscope. Had there been any traces of recent disturbance wessshould not have failed to detect it instantly. A single grain ofssgimlet-dust, for example, would have been as obvious as an apple.ssAny disorder in the glueing—any unusual gaping in thessjoints—would have sufficed to insure detection.”ss“I presume you looked to the mirrors, between the boards and thessplates, and you probed the beds and the bed-clothes, as well asssthe curtains and carpets.”ss“That of course; and when we had absolutely completed everyssparticle of the furniture in this way, then we examined the housessitself. We divided its entire surface into compartments, which wessnumbered, so that none might be missed; then we scrutinized eachssindividual square inch throughout the premises, including the twosshouses immediately adjoining, with the microscope, as before.”ss“The two houses adjoining!” I exclaimed; “you must have had assgreat deal of trouble.”ss“We had; but the reward offered is prodigious!”ss“You include the grounds about the houses?”ss“All the grounds are paved with brick. They gave us comparativelysslittle trouble. We examined the moss between the bricks, andssfound it undisturbed.”ss“You looked among D——‘s papers, of course, and into the books ofssthe library?”ss“Certainly; we opened every package and parcel; we not onlyssopened every book, but we turned over every leaf in each volume,ssnot contenting ourselves with a mere shake, according to thessfashion of some of our police officers. We also measured thessthickness of every book-cover, with the most accuratessadmeasurement, and applied to each the most jealous scrutiny ofssthe microscope. Had any of the bindings been recently meddledsswith, it would have been utterly impossible that the fact shouldsshave escaped observation. Some five or six volumes, just from thesshands of the binder, we carefully probed, longitudinally, withssthe needles.”ss“You explored the floors beneath the carpets?”ss“Beyond doubt. We removed every carpet, and examined the boardssswith the microscope.”ss“And the paper on the walls?”ss“Yes.”ss“You looked into the cellars?”ss“We did.”ss“Then,” I said, “you have been making a miscalculation, and thessletter is not upon the premises, as you suppose.”ss“I fear you are right there,” said the Prefect. “And now, Dupin,sswhat would you advise me to do?”ss“To make a thorough re-search of the premises.”ss“That is absolutely needless,” replied G——. “I am not more suressthat I breathe than I am that the letter is not at the Hotel.”ss“I have no better advice to give you,” said Dupin. “You have, ofsscourse, an accurate description of the letter?”ss“Oh yes!”—And here the Prefect, producing a memorandum-book,ssproceeded to read aloud a minute account of the internal, andssespecially of the external appearance of the missing document.ssSoon after finishing the perusal of this description, he took hisssdeparture, more entirely depressed in spirits than I had everssknown the good gentleman before.ssIn about a month afterwards he paid us another visit, and foundssus occupied very nearly as before. He took a pipe and a chair andssentered into some ordinary conversation. At length I said,—ss“Well, but G——, what of the purloined letter? I presume you havessat last made up your mind that there is no such thing asssoverreaching the Minister?”ss“Confound him, say I—yes; I made the re-examination, however, asssDupin suggested—but it was all labor lost, as I knew it wouldssbe.”ss“How much was the reward offered, did you say?” asked Dupin.ss“Why, a very great deal—a very liberal reward—I don’t like to saysshow much, precisely; but one thing I will say, that I wouldn’tssmind giving my individual check for fifty thousand francs to anyssone who could obtain me that letter. The fact is, it is becomingssof more and more importance every day; and the reward has beensslately doubled. If it were trebled, however, I could do no moressthan I have done.”ss“Why, yes,” said Dupin, drawlingly, between the whiffs of hisssmeerschaum, “I really—think, G——, you have not exertedssyourself—to the utmost in this matter. You might—do a littlessmore, I think, eh?”ss“How?—in what way?”ss“Why—puff, puff—you might—puff, puff—employ counsel in thessmatter, eh?—puff, puff, puff. Do you remember the story they tellssof Abernethy?”ss“No; hang Abernethy!”ss“To be sure! hang him and welcome. But, once upon a time, asscertain rich miser conceived the design of spunging upon thisssAbernethy for a medical opinion. Getting up, for this purpose, anssordinary conversation in a private company, he insinuated hissscase to the physician, as that of an imaginary individual.ss“‘We will suppose,’ said the miser, ‘that his symptoms are suchssand such; now, doctor, what would you have directed him to take?’ss“‘Take!’ said Abernethy, ‘why, take advice, to be sure.’”ss“But,” said the Prefect, a little discomposed, “I am perfectlysswilling to take advice, and to pay for it. I would really givessfifty thousand francs to any one who would aid me in the matter.”ss“In that case,” replied Dupin, opening a drawer, and producing asscheck-book, “you may as well fill me up a check for the amountssmentioned. When you have signed it, I will hand you the letter.”ssI was astounded. The Prefect appeared absolutelyssthunder-stricken. For some minutes he remained speechless andssmotionless, looking incredulously at my friend with open mouth,ssand eyes that seemed starting from their sockets; then,ssapparently recovering himself in some measure, he seized a pen,ssand after several pauses and vacant stares, finally filled up andsssigned a check for fifty thousand francs, and handed it acrossssthe table to Dupin. The latter examined it carefully andssdeposited it in his pocket-book; then, unlocking an escritoire,sstook thence a letter and gave it to the Prefect. This functionaryssgrasped it in a perfect agony of joy, opened it with a tremblingsshand, cast a rapid glance at its contents, and then, scramblingssand struggling to the door, rushed at length unceremoniously fromssthe room and from the house, without having uttered a syllablesssince Dupin had requested him to fill up the check.ssWhen he had gone, my friend entered into some explanations.ss“The Parisian police,” he said, “are exceedingly able in theirssway. They are persevering, ingenious, cunning, and thoroughlyssversed in the knowledge which their duties seem chiefly tossdemand. Thus, when G—— detailed to us his mode of searching thesspremises at the Hotel D——, I felt entire confidence in his havingssmade a satisfactory investigation—so far as his labors extended.”ss“So far as his labors extended?” said I.ss“Yes,” said Dupin. “The measures adopted were not only the bestssof their kind, but carried out to absolute perfection. Had thessletter been deposited within the range of their search, thesessfellows would, beyond a question, have found it.”ssI merely laughed—but he seemed quite serious in all that he said.ss“The measures, then,” he continued, “were good in their kind, andsswell executed; their defect lay in their being inapplicable tossthe case, and to the man. A certain set of highly ingeniousssresources are, with the Prefect, a sort of Procrustean bed, tosswhich he forcibly adapts his designs. But he perpetually errs byssbeing too deep or too shallow for the matter in hand; and many assschoolboy is a better reasoner than he. I knew one about eightssyears of age, whose success at guessing in the game of ‘even andssodd’ attracted universal admiration. This game is simple, and isssplayed with marbles. One player holds in his hand a number ofssthese toys, and demands of another whether that number is even orssodd. If the guess is right, the guesser wins one; if wrong, hessloses one. The boy to whom I allude won all the marbles of thessschool. Of course he had some principle of guessing; and this layssin mere observation and admeasurement of the astuteness of hisssopponents. For example, an arrant simpleton is his opponent, and,ssholding up his closed hand, asks, ‘are they even or odd?’ Ourssschoolboy replies, ‘odd,’ and loses; but upon the second trial hesswins, for he then says to himself, ‘the simpleton had them evenssupon the first trial, and his amount of cunning is justsssufficient to make him have them odd upon the second; I willsstherefore guess odd;’—he guesses odd, and wins. Now, with asssimpleton a degree above the first, he would have reasoned thus:ss‘This fellow finds that in the first instance I guessed odd, and,ssin the second, he will propose to himself, upon the firstssimpulse, a simple variation from even to odd, as did the firstsssimpleton; but then a second thought will suggest that this issstoo simple a variation, and finally he will decide upon puttingssit even as before. I will therefore guess even;’—he guesses even,ssand wins. Now this mode of reasoning in the schoolboy, whom hisssfellows termed ‘lucky,’—what, in its last analysis, is it?”ss“It is merely,” I said, “an identification of the reasoner’sssintellect with that of his opponent.”ss“It is,” said Dupin; “and, upon inquiring of the boy by whatssmeans he effected the thorough identification in which hissssuccess consisted, I received answer as follows: ‘When I wish tossfind out how wise, or how stupid, or how good, or how wicked isssany one, or what are his thoughts at the moment, I fashion thessexpression of my face, as accurately as possible, in accordancesswith the expression of his, and then wait to see what thoughts orsssentiments arise in my mind or heart, as if to match orsscorrespond with the expression.’ This response of the schoolboysslies at the bottom of all the spurious profundity which has beenssattributed to Rochefoucault, to La Bougive, to Machiavelli, andssto Campanella.”ss“And the identification,” I said, “of the reasoner’s intellectsswith that of his opponent, depends, if I understand you aright,ssupon the accuracy with which the opponent’s intellect isssadmeasured.”ss“For its practical value it depends upon this,” replied Dupin;ss“and the Prefect and his cohort fail so frequently, first, byssdefault of this identification, and, secondly, byssill-admeasurement, or rather through non-admeasurement, of thessintellect with which they are engaged. They consider only theirssown ideas of ingenuity; and, in searching for anything hidden,ssadvert only to the modes in which they would have hidden it. Theyssare right in this much—that their own ingenuity is a faithfulssrepresentative of that of the mass; but when the cunning of thessindividual felon is diverse in character from their own, thessfelon foils them, of course. This always happens when it is abovesstheir own, and very usually when it is below. They have nossvariation of principle in their investigations; at best, whenssurged by some unusual emergency—by some extraordinary reward—theyssextend or exaggerate their old modes of practice, withoutsstouching their principles. What, for example, in this case ofssD——, has been done to vary the principle of action? What is allssthis boring, and probing, and sounding, and scrutinizing with thessmicroscope and dividing the surface of the building intossregistered square inches—what is it all but an exaggeration ofssthe application of the one principle or set of principles ofsssearch, which are based upon the one set of notions regardingsshuman ingenuity, to which the Prefect, in the long routine of hisssduty, has been accustomed? Do you not see he has taken it forssgranted that all men proceed to conceal a letter,—not exactly inssa gimlet hole bored in a chair-leg—but, at least, in somessout-of-the-way hole or corner suggested by the same tenor ofssthought which would urge a man to secrete a letter in assgimlet-hole bored in a chair-leg? And do you not see also, thatsssuch recherchés nooks for concealment are adapted only forssordinary occasions, and would be adopted only by ordinaryssintellects; for, in all cases of concealment, a disposal of thessarticle concealed—a disposal of it in this recherché manner,—is,ssin the very first instance, presumable and presumed; and thus itsssdiscovery depends, not at all upon the acumen, but altogetherssupon the mere care, patience, and determination of the seekers;ssand where the case is of importance—or, what amounts to the samessthing in the political eyes, when the reward is of magnitude,—thessqualities in question have never been known to fail. You will nowssunderstand what I meant in suggesting that, had the purloinedssletter been hidden any where within the limits of the Prefect’sssexamination—in other words, had the principle of its concealmentssbeen comprehended within the principles of the Prefect—itsssdiscovery would have been a matter altogether beyond question.ssThis functionary, however, has been thoroughly mystified; and thessremote source of his defeat lies in the supposition that thessMinister is a fool, because he has acquired renown as a poet. Allssfools are poets; this the Prefect feels; and he is merely guiltyssof a non distributio medii in thence inferring that all poets aressfools.”ss“But is this really the poet?” I asked. “There are two brothers,ssI know; and both have attained reputation in letters. ThessMinister I believe has written learnedly on the DifferentialssCalculus. He is a mathematician, and no poet.”ss“You are mistaken; I know him well; he is both. As poet andssmathematician, he would reason well; as mere mathematician, hesscould not have reasoned at all, and thus would have been at thessmercy of the Prefect.”ss“You surprise me,” I said, “by these opinions, which have beensscontradicted by the voice of the world. You do not mean to set atssnaught the well-digested idea of centuries. The mathematicalssreason has long been regarded as the reason par excellence.”ss“‘Il y a à parièr,’” replied Dupin, quoting from Chamfort, “‘quesstoute idée publique, toute convention reçue est une sottise, carsselle a convenue au plus grand nombre.’ The mathematicians, Issgrant you, have done their best to promulgate the popular errorssto which you allude, and which is none the less an error for itssspromulgation as truth. With an art worthy a better cause, forssexample, they have insinuated the term ‘analysis’ intossapplication to algebra. The French are the originators of thisssparticular deception; but if a term is of any importance—if wordsssderive any value from applicability—then ‘analysis’ conveysss‘algebra’ about as much as, in Latin, ‘ambitus’ impliesss‘ambition,’ ‘_religio_’ ‘religion,’ or ‘_homines honesti_’ a setssof _honorable_ men.”ss“You have a quarrel on hand, I see,” said I, “with some of thessalgebraists of Paris; but proceed.”ss“I dispute the availability, and thus the value, of that reasonsswhich is cultivated in any especial form other than thessabstractly logical. I dispute, in particular, the reason educedssby mathematical study. The mathematics are the science of formssand quantity; mathematical reasoning is merely logic applied tossobservation upon form and quantity. The great error lies insssupposing that even the truths of what is called pure algebra,ssare abstract or general truths. And this error is so egregiousssthat I am confounded at the universality with which it has beenssreceived. Mathematical axioms are not axioms of general truth.ssWhat is true of relation—of form and quantity—is often grosslyssfalse in regard to morals, for example. In this latter science itssis very usually untrue that the aggregated parts are equal to thesswhole. In chemistry also the axiom fails. In the consideration ofssmotive it fails; for two motives, each of a given value, havessnot, necessarily, a value when united, equal to the sum of theirssvalues apart. There are numerous other mathematical truths whichssare only truths within the limits of relation. But thessmathematician argues, from his finite truths, through habit, asssif they were of an absolutely general applicability—as the worldssindeed imagines them to be. Bryant, in his very learnedss‘Mythology,’ mentions an analogous source of error, when he saysssthat ‘although the Pagan fables are not believed, yet we forgetssourselves continually, and make inferences from them as existingssrealities.’ With the algebraists, however, who are Pagansssthemselves, the ‘Pagan fables’ are believed, and the inferencesssare made, not so much through lapse of memory, as through anssunaccountable addling of the brains. In short, I never yetssencountered the mere mathematician who could be trusted out ofssequal roots, or one who did not clandestinely hold it as a pointssof his faith that x2+px was absolutely and unconditionally equalssto q. Say to one of these gentlemen, by way of experiment, if youssplease, that you believe occasions may occur where x2+px is notssaltogether equal to q, and, having made him understand what youssmean, get out of his reach as speedily as convenient, for, beyondssdoubt, he will endeavor to knock you down.ss“I mean to say,” continued Dupin, while I merely laughed at hissslast observations, “that if the Minister had been no more than assmathematician, the Prefect would have been under no necessity ofssgiving me this check. I know him, however, as both mathematicianssand poet, and my measures were adapted to his capacity, withssreference to the circumstances by which he was surrounded. I knewsshim as a courtier, too, and as a bold intriguant. Such a man, Issconsidered, could not fail to be aware of the ordinary policialssmodes of action. He could not have failed to anticipate—andssevents have proved that he did not fail to anticipate—thesswaylayings to which he was subjected. He must have foreseen, Issreflected, the secret investigations of his premises. Hisssfrequent absences from home at night, which were hailed by thessPrefect as certain aids to his success, I regarded only as ruses,ssto afford opportunity for thorough search to the police, and thusssthe sooner to impress them with the conviction to which G——, inssfact, did finally arrive—the conviction that the letter was notssupon the premises. I felt, also, that the whole train of thought,sswhich I was at some pains in detailing to you just now,ssconcerning the invariable principle of policial action insssearches for articles concealed—I felt that this whole train ofssthought would necessarily pass through the mind of the Minister.ssIt would imperatively lead him to despise all the ordinary nooksssof concealment. He could not, I reflected, be so weak as not tosssee that the most intricate and remote recess of his hotel wouldssbe as open as his commonest closets to the eyes, to the probes,ssto the gimlets, and to the microscopes of the Prefect. I saw, inssfine, that he would be driven, as a matter of course, tosssimplicity, if not deliberately induced to it as a matter ofsschoice. You will remember, perhaps, how desperately the Prefectsslaughed when I suggested, upon our first interview, that it wasssjust possible this mystery troubled him so much on account of itsssbeing so very self-evident.”ss“Yes,” said I, “I remember his merriment well. I really thoughtsshe would have fallen into convulsions.”ss“The material world,” continued Dupin, “abounds with very strictssanalogies to the immaterial; and thus some color of truth hasssbeen given to the rhetorical dogma, that metaphor, or simile, mayssbe made to strengthen an argument, as well as to embellish assdescription. The principle of the vis inertiæ, for example, seemsssto be identical in physics and metaphysics. It is not more truessin the former, that a large body is with more difficulty set inssmotion than a smaller one, and that its subsequent momentum issscommensurate with this difficulty, than it is, in the latter,ssthat intellects of the vaster capacity, while more forcible, moressconstant, and more eventful in their movements than those ofssinferior grade, are yet the less readily moved, and moressembarrassed and full of hesitation in the first few steps ofsstheir progress. Again: have you ever noticed which of the streetsssigns, over the shop-doors, are the most attractive ofssattention?”ss“I have never given the matter a thought,” I said.ss“There is a game of puzzles,” he resumed, “which is played upon assmap. One party playing requires another to find a given word—thessname of town, river, state or empire—any word, in short, upon thessmotley and perplexed surface of the chart. A novice in the gamessgenerally seeks to embarrass his opponents by giving them thessmost minutely lettered names; but the adept selects such words asssstretch, in large characters, from one end of the chart to thessother. These, like the over-largely lettered signs and placardsssof the street, escape observation by dint of being excessivelyssobvious; and here the physical oversight is precisely analogoussswith the moral inapprehension by which the intellect suffers tosspass unnoticed those considerations which are too obtrusively andsstoo palpably self-evident. But this is a point, it appears,sssomewhat above or beneath the understanding of the Prefect. Hessnever once thought it probable, or possible, that the Ministersshad deposited the letter immediately beneath the nose of thesswhole world, by way of best preventing any portion of that worldssfrom perceiving it.ss“But the more I reflected upon the daring, dashing, andssdiscriminating ingenuity of D——; upon the fact that the documentssmust always have been at hand, if he intended to use it to goodsspurpose; and upon the decisive evidence, obtained by the Prefect,ssthat it was not hidden within the limits of that dignitary’sssordinary search—the more satisfied I became that, to conceal thisssletter, the Minister had resorted to the comprehensive andsssagacious expedient of not attempting to conceal it at all.ss“Full of these ideas, I prepared myself with a pair of greenssspectacles, and called one fine morning, quite by accident, atssthe Ministerial hotel. I found D—— at home, yawning, lounging,ssand dawdling, as usual, and pretending to be in the lastssextremity of ennui. He is, perhaps, the most really energeticsshuman being now alive—but that is only when nobody sees him.ss“To be even with him, I complained of my weak eyes, and lamentedssthe necessity of the spectacles, under cover of which Isscautiously and thoroughly surveyed the whole apartment, whilessseemingly intent only upon the conversation of my host.ss“I paid especial attention to a large writing-table near which hesssat, and upon which lay confusedly, some miscellaneous lettersssand other papers, with one or two musical instruments and a fewssbooks. Here, however, after a long and very deliberate scrutiny,ssI saw nothing to excite particular suspicion.ss“At length my eyes, in going the circuit of the room, fell upon asstrumpery fillagree card-rack of pasteboard, that hung dangling byssa dirty blue ribbon, from a little brass knob just beneath thessmiddle of the mantel-piece. In this rack, which had three or foursscompartments, were five or six visiting cards and a solitaryssletter. This last was much soiled and crumpled. It was tornssnearly in two, across the middle—as if a design, in the firstssinstance, to tear it entirely up as worthless, had been altered,ssor stayed, in the second. It had a large black seal, bearing thessD—— cipher _very_ conspicuously, and was addressed, in assdiminutive female hand, to D——, the minister, himself. It wasssthrust carelessly, and even, as it seemed, contemptuously, intossone of the uppermost divisions of the rack.ss“No sooner had I glanced at this letter, than I concluded it tossbe that of which I was in search. To be sure, it was, to allssappearance, radically different from the one of which the Prefectsshad read us so minute a description. Here the seal was large andssblack, with the D—— cipher; there it was small and red, with thessducal arms of the S—— family. Here, the address, to the Minister,ssdiminutive and feminine; there the superscription, to a certainssroyal personage, was markedly bold and decided; the size alonessformed a point of correspondence. But, then, the radicalness ofssthese differences, which was excessive; the dirt; the soiled andsstorn condition of the paper, so inconsistent with the truessmethodical habits of D——, and so suggestive of a design to deludessthe beholder into an idea of the worthlessness of thessdocument—these things, together with the hyper-obtrusivesssituation of this document, full in the view of every visitor,ssand thus exactly in accordance with the conclusions to which Isshad previously arrived; these things, I say, were stronglysscorroborative of suspicion, in one who came with the intention tosssuspect.ss“I protracted my visit as long as possible, and, while Issmaintained a most animated discussion with the Minister upon asstopic which I knew well had never failed to interest and excitesshim, I kept my attention really riveted upon the letter. In thisssexamination, I committed to memory its external appearance andssarrangement in the rack; and also fell, at length, upon assdiscovery which set at rest whatever trivial doubt I might havessentertained. In scrutinizing the edges of the paper, I observedssthem to be more chafed than seemed necessary. They presented thessbroken appearance which is manifested when a stiff paper, havingssbeen once folded and pressed with a folder, is refolded in assreversed direction, in the same creases or edges which had formedssthe original fold. This discovery was sufficient. It was clear tossme that the letter had been turned, as a glove, inside out,ssre-directed, and re-sealed. I bade the Minister good morning, andsstook my departure at once, leaving a gold snuff-box upon thesstable.ss“The next morning I called for the snuff-box, when we resumed,ssquite eagerly, the conversation of the preceding day. While thusssengaged, however, a loud report, as if of a pistol, was heardssimmediately beneath the windows of the hotel, and was succeededssby a series of fearful screams, and the shoutings of a terrifiedssmob. D—— rushed to a casement, threw it open, and looked out. Inssthe meantime, I stepped to the card-rack, took the letter, put itssin my pocket, and replaced it by a fac-simile, (so far as regardsssexternals,) which I had carefully prepared at mysslodgings—imitating the D—— cipher, very readily, by means of assseal formed of bread.ss“The disturbance in the street had been occasioned by the franticssbehavior of a man with a musket. He had fired it among a crowd ofsswomen and children. It proved, however, to have been withoutssball, and the fellow was suffered to go his way as a lunatic or assdrunkard. When he had gone, D—— came from the window, whither Isshad followed him immediately upon securing the object in view.ssSoon afterwards I bade him farewell. The pretended lunatic was assman in my own pay.”ss“But what purpose had you,” I asked, “in replacing the letter byssa fac-simile? Would it not have been better, at the first visit,ssto have seized it openly, and departed?”ss“D——,” replied Dupin, “is a desperate man, and a man of nerve.ssHis hotel, too, is not without attendants devoted to hisssinterests. Had I made the wild attempt you suggest, I might neversshave left the Ministerial presence alive. The good people ofssParis might have heard of me no more. But I had an object apartssfrom these considerations. You know my political prepossessions.ssIn this matter, I act as a partisan of the lady concerned. Forsseighteen months the Minister has had her in his power. She hasssnow him in hers—since, being unaware that the letter is not insshis possession, he will proceed with his exactions as if it was.ssThus will he inevitably commit himself, at once, to his politicalssdestruction. His downfall, too, will not be more precipitate thanssawkward. It is all very well to talk about the facilis descensusssAverni; but in all kinds of climbing, as Catalani said ofsssinging, it is far more easy to get up than to come down. In thesspresent instance I have no sympathy—at least no pity—for him whossdescends. He is that monstrum horrendum, an unprincipled man ofssgenius. I confess, however, that I should like very well to knowssthe precise character of his thoughts, when, being defied by hersswhom the Prefect terms ‘a certain personage’ he is reduced tossopening the letter which I left for him in the card-rack.”ss“How? did you put any thing particular in it?”ss“Why—it did not seem altogether right to leave the interiorssblank—that would have been insulting. D——, at Vienna once, did messan evil turn, which I told him, quite good-humoredly, that Issshould remember. So, as I knew he would feel some curiosity inssregard to the identity of the person who had outwitted him, Issthought it a pity not to give him a clue. He is well acquaintedsswith my MS., and I just copied into the middle of the blank sheetssthe words—ss“‘— — Un dessein si funeste,ssS’il n’est digne d’Atrée, est digne de Thyeste.ssThey are to be found in Crébillon’s ‘Atrée.’”ssTHE THOUSAND-AND-SECOND TALE OF SCHEHERAZADEssTruth is stranger than fiction.—_Old Saying_ssHaving had occasion, lately, in the course of some Orientalssinvestigations, to consult the Tellmenow Isitsöornot, a worksswhich (like the Zohar of Simeon Jochaides) is scarcely known atssall, even in Europe; and which has never been quoted, to myssknowledge, by any American—if we except, perhaps, the author ofssthe “Curiosities of American Literature”;—having had occasion, Isssay, to turn over some pages of the first-mentioned veryssremarkable work, I was not a little astonished to discover thatssthe literary world has hitherto been strangely in errorssrespecting the fate of the vizier’s daughter, Scheherazade, asssthat fate is depicted in the “Arabian Nights”; and that thess_dénouement_ there given, if not altogether inaccurate, as far asssit goes, is at least to blame in not having gone very muchssfarther.ssFor full information on this interesting topic, I must refer thessinquisitive reader to the “Isitsöornot” itself; but in thessmeantime, I shall be pardoned for giving a summary of what Issthere discovered.ssIt will be remembered, that, in the usual version of the tales, asscertain monarch having good cause to be jealous of his queen, notssonly puts her to death, but makes a vow, by his beard and thessprophet, to espouse each night the most beautiful maiden in hisssdominions, and the next morning to deliver her up to thessexecutioner.ssHaving fulfilled this vow for many years to the letter, and withssa religious punctuality and method that conferred great creditssupon him as a man of devout feeling and excellent sense, he wasssinterrupted one afternoon (no doubt at his prayers) by a visitssfrom his grand vizier, to whose daughter, it appears, there hadssoccurred an idea.ssHer name was Scheherazade, and her idea was, that she wouldsseither redeem the land from the depopulating tax upon its beauty,ssor perish, after the approved fashion of all heroines, in thessattempt.ssAccordingly, and although we do not find it to be leap-yearss(which makes the sacrifice more meritorious), she deputes herssfather, the grand vizier, to make an offer to the king of hersshand. This hand the king eagerly accepts—(he had intended to takessit at all events, and had put off the matter from day to day,ssonly through fear of the vizier),—but, in accepting it now, hessgives all parties very distinctly to understand, that, grandssvizier or no grand vizier, he has not the slightest design ofssgiving up one iota of his vow or of his privileges. When,sstherefore, the fair Scheherazade insisted upon marrying the king,ssand did actually marry him despite her father’s excellent advicessnot to do any thing of the kind—when she would and did marry him,ssI say, will I, nill I, it was with her beautiful black eyes asssthoroughly open as the nature of the case would allow.ssIt seems, however, that this politic damsel (who had been readingssMachiavelli, beyond doubt), had a very ingenious little plot inssher mind. On the night of the wedding, she contrived, upon Issforget what specious pretence, to have her sister occupy a couchsssufficiently near that of the royal pair to admit of easyssconversation from bed to bed; and, a little before cock-crowing,ssshe took care to awaken the good monarch, her husband (who boressher none the worse will because he intended to wring her neck onssthe morrow),—she managed to awaken him, I say, (although onssaccount of a capital conscience and an easy digestion, he sleptsswell) by the profound interest of a story (about a rat and assblack cat, I think) which she was narrating (all in an undertone,ssof course) to her sister. When the day broke, it so happened thatssthis history was not altogether finished, and that Scheherazade,ssin the nature of things could not finish it just then, since itsswas high time for her to get up and be bowstrung—a thing verysslittle more pleasant than hanging, only a trifle more genteel!ssThe king’s curiosity, however, prevailing, I am sorry to say,sseven over his sound religious principles, induced him for thisssonce to postpone the fulfilment of his vow until next morning,ssfor the purpose and with the hope of hearing that night how itssfared in the end with the black cat (a black cat, I think it was)ssand the rat.ssThe night having arrived, however, the lady Scheherazade not onlyssput the finishing stroke to the black cat and the rat (the ratsswas blue) but before she well knew what she was about, foundssherself deep in the intricacies of a narration, having referencess(if I am not altogether mistaken) to a pink horse (with greensswings) that went, in a violent manner, by clockwork, and wassswound up with an indigo key. With this history the king was evenssmore profoundly interested than with the other—and, as the dayssbroke before its conclusion (notwithstanding all the queen’sssendeavors to get through with it in time for the bowstringing),ssthere was again no resource but to postpone that ceremony asssbefore, for twenty-four hours. The next night there happened asssimilar accident with a similar result; and then the next—andssthen again the next; so that, in the end, the good monarch,sshaving been unavoidably deprived of all opportunity to keep hisssvow during a period of no less than one thousand and one nights,sseither forgets it altogether by the expiration of this time, orssgets himself absolved of it in the regular way, or (what is moressprobable) breaks it outright, as well as the head of his fatherssconfessor. At all events, Scheherazade, who, being lineallyssdescended from Eve, fell heir, perhaps, to the whole sevenssbaskets of talk, which the latter lady, we all know, picked upssfrom under the trees in the garden of Eden; Scheherazade, I say,ssfinally triumphed, and the tariff upon beauty was repealed.ssNow, this conclusion (which is that of the story as we have itssupon record) is, no doubt, excessively proper and pleasant—butssalas! like a great many pleasant things, is more pleasant thansstrue, and I am indebted altogether to the “Isitsöornot” for thessmeans of correcting the error. “Le mieux,” says a French proverb,ss“est l’ennemi du bien,” and, in mentioning that Scheherazade hadssinherited the seven baskets of talk, I should have added that shessput them out at compound interest until they amounted tossseventy-seven.ss“My dear sister,” said she, on the thousand-and-second night, (Issquote the language of the “Isitsöornot” at this point, verbatim)ss“my dear sister,” said she, “now that all this little difficultyssabout the bowstring has blown over, and that this odious tax isssso happily repealed, I feel that I have been guilty of greatssindiscretion in withholding from you and the king (who I am sorryssto say, snores—a thing no gentleman would do) the full conclusionssof Sinbad the sailor. This person went through numerous other andssmore interesting adventures than those which I related; but thesstruth is, I felt sleepy on the particular night of theirssnarration, and so was seduced into cutting them short—a grievoussspiece of misconduct, for which I only trust that Allah willssforgive me. But even yet it is not too late to remedy my greatssneglect—and as soon as I have given the king a pinch or two inssorder to wake him up so far that he may stop making that horriblessnoise, I will forthwith entertain you (and him if he pleases)sswith the sequel of this very remarkable story.”ssHereupon the sister of Scheherazade, as I have it from thess“Isitsöornot,” expressed no very particular intensity ofssgratification; but the king, having been sufficiently pinched, atsslength ceased snoring, and finally said, “Hum!” and then “Hoo!”sswhen the queen, understanding these words (which are no doubtssArabic) to signify that he was all attention, and would do hisssbest not to snore any more—the queen, I say, having arrangedssthese matters to her satisfaction, re-entered thus, at once, intossthe history of Sinbad the sailor:ss“‘At length, in my old age,’ [these are the words of Sinbadsshimself, as retailed by Scheherazade]—‘at length, in my old age,ssand after enjoying many years of tranquillity at home, I becamessonce more possessed of a desire of visiting foreign countries;ssand one day, without acquainting any of my family with my design,ssI packed up some bundles of such merchandise as was most preciousssand least bulky, and, engaging a porter to carry them, went withsshim down to the sea-shore, to await the arrival of any chancessvessel that might convey me out of the kingdom into some regionsswhich I had not as yet explored.ss“‘Having deposited the packages upon the sands, we sat downssbeneath some trees, and looked out into the ocean in the hope ofssperceiving a ship, but during several hours we saw none whatever.ssAt length I fancied that I could hear a singular buzzing orsshumming sound; and the porter, after listening awhile, declaredssthat he also could distinguish it. Presently it grew louder, andssthen still louder, so that we could have no doubt that the objectsswhich caused it was approaching us. At length, on the edge of thesshorizon, we discovered a black speck, which rapidly increased insssize until we made it out to be a vast monster, swimming with assgreat part of its body above the surface of the sea. It camesstoward us with inconceivable swiftness, throwing up huge waves ofssfoam around its breast, and illuminating all that part of the seassthrough which it passed, with a long line of fire that extendedssfar off into the distance.ss“‘As the thing drew near we saw it very distinctly. Its lengthsswas equal to that of three of the loftiest trees that grow, andssit was as wide as the great hall of audience in your palace, Ossmost sublime and munificent of the Caliphs. Its body, which wasssunlike that of ordinary fishes, was as solid as a rock, and of assjetty blackness throughout all that portion of it which floatedssabove the water, with the exception of a narrow blood-red streakssthat completely begirdled it. The belly, which floated beneathssthe surface, and of which we could get only a glimpse now andssthen as the monster rose and fell with the billows, was entirelysscovered with metallic scales, of a color like that of the moon inssmisty weather. The back was flat and nearly white, and from itssthere extended upwards of six spines, about half the length ofssthe whole body.ss“‘This horrible creature had no mouth that we could perceive;ssbut, as if to make up for this deficiency, it was provided withssat least four score of eyes, that protruded from their socketssslike those of the green dragon-fly, and were arranged all aroundssthe body in two rows, one above the other, and parallel to thessblood-red streak, which seemed to answer the purpose of ansseyebrow. Two or three of these dreadful eyes were much largerssthan the others, and had the appearance of solid gold.ss“‘Although this beast approached us, as I have before said, withssthe greatest rapidity, it must have been moved altogether byssnecromancy—for it had neither fins like a fish nor web-feet likessa duck, nor wings like the seashell which is blown along in thessmanner of a vessel; nor yet did it writhe itself forward as dossthe eels. Its head and its tail were shaped precisely alike,ssonly, not far from the latter, were two small holes that servedssfor nostrils, and through which the monster puffed out its thickssbreath with prodigious violence, and with a shrieking,ssdisagreeable noise.ss“‘Our terror at beholding this hideous thing was very great, butssit was even surpassed by our astonishment, when upon getting assnearer look, we perceived upon the creature’s back a vast numberssof animals about the size and shape of men, and altogether muchssresembling them, except that they wore no garments (as men do),ssbeing supplied (by nature, no doubt) with an ugly uncomfortablesscovering, a good deal like cloth, but fitting so tight to thessskin, as to render the poor wretches laughably awkward, and putssthem apparently to severe pain. On the very tips of their headssswere certain square-looking boxes, which, at first sight, Issthought might have been intended to answer as turbans, but I soonssdiscovered that they were excessively heavy and solid, and Isstherefore concluded they were contrivances designed, by theirssgreat weight, to keep the heads of the animals steady and safessupon their shoulders. Around the necks of the creatures weressfastened black collars, (badges of servitude, no doubt,) such assswe keep on our dogs, only much wider and infinitely stiffer, sossthat it was quite impossible for these poor victims to move theirssheads in any direction without moving the body at the same time;ssand thus they were doomed to perpetual contemplation of theirssnoses—a view puggish and snubby in a wonderful, if not positivelyssin an awful degree.ss“‘When the monster had nearly reached the shore where we stood,ssit suddenly pushed out one of its eyes to a great extent, andssemitted from it a terrible flash of fire, accompanied by a densesscloud of smoke, and a noise that I can compare to nothing butssthunder. As the smoke cleared away, we saw one of the oddssman-animals standing near the head of the large beast with asstrumpet in his hand, through which (putting it to his mouth) hesspresently addressed us in loud, harsh, and disagreeable accents,ssthat, perhaps, we should have mistaken for language, had they notsscome altogether through the nose.ss“‘Being thus evidently spoken to, I was at a loss how to reply,ssas I could in no manner understand what was said; and in thisssdifficulty I turned to the porter, who was near swooning throughssaffright, and demanded of him his opinion as to what species ofssmonster it was, what it wanted, and what kind of creatures thosesswere that so swarmed upon its back. To this the porter replied,ssas well as he could for trepidation, that he had once beforessheard of this sea-beast; that it was a cruel demon, with bowelsssof sulphur and blood of fire, created by evil genii as the meansssof inflicting misery upon mankind; that the things upon its backsswere vermin, such as sometimes infest cats and dogs, only asslittle larger and more savage; and that these vermin had theirssuses, however evil—for, through the torture they caused the beastssby their nibbling and stingings, it was goaded into that degreessof wrath which was requisite to make it roar and commit ill, andssso fulfil the vengeful and malicious designs of the wicked genii.ss“This account determined me to take to my heels, and, withoutssonce even looking behind me, I ran at full speed up into thesshills, while the porter ran equally fast, although nearly in anssopposite direction, so that, by these means, he finally made hisssescape with my bundles, of which I have no doubt he tookssexcellent care—although this is a point I cannot determine, as Issdo not remember that I ever beheld him again.ss“‘For myself, I was so hotly pursued by a swarm of the men-verminss(who had come to the shore in boats) that I was very soonssovertaken, bound hand and foot, and conveyed to the beast, whichssimmediately swam out again into the middle of the sea.ss“‘I now bitterly repented my folly in quitting a comfortable homessto peril my life in such adventures as this; but regret beingssuseless, I made the best of my condition, and exerted myself tosssecure the goodwill of the man-animal that owned the trumpet, andsswho appeared to exercise authority over his fellows. I succeededssso well in this endeavor that, in a few days, the creaturessbestowed upon me various tokens of his favor, and in the end evensswent to the trouble of teaching me the rudiments of what it wasssvain enough to denominate its language; so that, at length, I wasssenabled to converse with it readily, and came to make itsscomprehend the ardent desire I had of seeing the world.ss“‘Washish squashish squeak, Sinbad, hey-diddle diddle, grunt untssgrumble, hiss, fiss, whiss,’ said he to me, one day afterssdinner—but I beg a thousand pardons, I had forgotten that yourssmajesty is not conversant with the dialect of the Cock-neighs (sossthe man-animals were called; I presume because their languagessformed the connecting link between that of the horse and that ofssthe rooster). With your permission, I will translate. ‘Washishsssquashish,’ and so forth:—that is to say, ‘I am happy to find, myssdear Sinbad, that you are really a very excellent fellow; we aressnow about doing a thing which is called circumnavigating thessglobe; and since you are so desirous of seeing the world, I willssstrain a point and give you a free passage upon back of thessbeast.’”ssWhen the Lady Scheherazade had proceeded thus far, relates thess“Isitsöornot,” the king turned over from his left side to hisssright, and said:ss“It is, in fact, very surprising, my dear queen, that youssomitted, hitherto, these latter adventures of Sinbad. Do you knowssI think them exceedingly entertaining and strange?”ssThe king having thus expressed himself, we are told, the fairssScheherazade resumed her history in the following words:ss“Sinbad went on in this manner with his narrative—‘I thanked thessman-animal for its kindness, and soon found myself very much atsshome on the beast, which swam at a prodigious rate through thessocean; although the surface of the latter is, in that part of thessworld, by no means flat, but round like a pomegranate, so that wesswent—so to say—either up hill or down hill all the time.’ss“That I think, was very singular,” interrupted the king.ss“Nevertheless, it is quite true,” replied Scheherazade.ss“I have my doubts,” rejoined the king; “but, pray, be so good asssto go on with the story.”ss“I will,” said the queen. “‘The beast,’ continued Sinbad to thesscaliph, ‘swam, as I have related, up hill and down hill until, atsslength, we arrived at an island, many hundreds of miles insscircumference, but which, nevertheless, had been built in thessmiddle of the sea by a colony of little things likesscaterpillars.’” (*1)ss“Hum!” said the king.ss“‘Leaving this island,’ said Sinbad—(for Scheherazade, it must bessunderstood, took no notice of her husband’s ill-manneredssejaculation) ‘leaving this island, we came to another where thessforests were of solid stone, and so hard that they shivered tosspieces the finest-tempered axes with which we endeavoured to cutssthem down.’” (*2)ss“Hum!” said the king, again; but Scheherazade, paying him nossattention, continued in the language of Sinbad.ss“‘Passing beyond this last island, we reached a country wheressthere was a cave that ran to the distance of thirty or fortyssmiles within the bowels of the earth, and that contained assgreater number of far more spacious and more magnificent palacesssthan are to be found in all Damascus and Bagdad. From the roofsssof these palaces there hung myriads of gems, like diamonds, butsslarger than men; and in among the streets of towers and pyramidsssand temples, there flowed immense rivers as black as ebony, andssswarming with fish that had no eyes.’” (*3)ss“Hum!” said the king.ss“‘We then swam into a region of the sea where we found a loftyssmountain, down whose sides there streamed torrents of meltedssmetal, some of which were twelve miles wide and sixty miles longss(*4); while from an abyss on the summit, issued so vast assquantity of ashes that the sun was entirely blotted out from thessheavens, and it became darker than the darkest midnight; so thatsswhen we were even at the distance of a hundred and fifty milesssfrom the mountain, it was impossible to see the whitest object,sshowever close we held it to our eyes.’” (*5)ss“Hum!” said the king.ss“‘After quitting this coast, the beast continued his voyage untilsswe met with a land in which the nature of things seemedssreversed—for we here saw a great lake, at the bottom of which,ssmore than a hundred feet beneath the surface of the water, theressflourished in full leaf a forest of tall and luxuriant trees.’”ss(*6)ss“Hoo!” said the king.ss“Some hundred miles farther on brought us to a climate where thessatmosphere was so dense as to sustain iron or steel, just as ourssown does feather.’” (*7)ss“Fiddle de dee,” said the king.ss“Proceeding still in the same direction, we presently arrived atssthe most magnificent region in the whole world. Through it theressmeandered a glorious river for several thousands of miles. Thisssriver was of unspeakable depth, and of a transparency richer thanssthat of amber. It was from three to six miles in width; and itsssbanks which arose on either side to twelve hundred feet inssperpendicular height, were crowned with ever-blossoming trees andssperpetual sweet-scented flowers, that made the whole territoryssone gorgeous garden; but the name of this luxuriant land was thessKingdom of Horror, and to enter it was inevitable death.’” (*8)ss“Humph!” said the king.ss“‘We left this kingdom in great haste, and, after some days, camessto another, where we were astonished to perceive myriads ofssmonstrous animals with horns resembling scythes upon their heads.ssThese hideous beasts dig for themselves vast caverns in the soil,ssof a funnel shape, and line the sides of them with rocks, sossdisposed one upon the other that they fall instantly, whensstrodden upon by other animals, thus precipitating them into thessmonster’s dens, where their blood is immediately sucked, andsstheir carcasses afterwards hurled contemptuously out to anssimmense distance from “the caverns of death."’” (*9)ss“Pooh!” said the king.ss“‘Continuing our progress, we perceived a district withssvegetables that grew not upon any soil but in the air. (*10)ssThere were others that sprang from the substance of otherssvegetables; (*11) others that derived their substance from thessbodies of living animals; (*12) and then again, there were othersssthat glowed all over with intense fire; (*13) others that movedssfrom place to place at pleasure, (*14) and what was still moresswonderful, we discovered flowers that lived and breathed andssmoved their limbs at will and had, moreover, the detestablesspassion of mankind for enslaving other creatures, and confiningssthem in horrid and solitary prisons until the fulfillment ofssappointed tasks.’” (*15)ss“Pshaw!” said the king.ss“‘Quitting this land, we soon arrived at another in which thessbees and the birds are mathematicians of such genius andsserudition, that they give daily instructions in the science ofssgeometry to the wise men of the empire. The king of the placesshaving offered a reward for the solution of two very difficultssproblems, they were solved upon the spot—the one by the bees, andssthe other by the birds; but the king keeping their solution asssecret, it was only after the most profound researches and labor,ssand the writing of an infinity of big books, during a long seriesssof years, that the men-mathematicians at length arrived at thessidentical solutions which had been given upon the spot by thessbees and by the birds.’” (*16)ss“Oh my!” said the king.ss“‘We had scarcely lost sight of this empire when we foundssourselves close upon another, from whose shores there flew overssour heads a flock of fowls a mile in breadth, and two hundred andssforty miles long; so that, although they flew a mile during everyssminute, it required no less than four hours for the whole flockssto pass over us—in which there were several millions of millionsssof fowl.’” (*17)ss“Oh fy!” said the king.ss“‘No sooner had we got rid of these birds, which occasioned usssgreat annoyance, than we were terrified by the appearance of assfowl of another kind, and infinitely larger than even the rocssswhich I met in my former voyages; for it was bigger than thessbiggest of the domes on your seraglio, oh, most Munificent ofssCaliphs. This terrible fowl had no head that we could perceive,ssbut was fashioned entirely of belly, which was of a prodigiousssfatness and roundness, of a soft-looking substance, smooth,ssshining and striped with various colors. In its talons, thessmonster was bearing away to his eyrie in the heavens, a housessfrom which it had knocked off the roof, and in the interior ofsswhich we distinctly saw human beings, who, beyond doubt, were inssa state of frightful despair at the horrible fate which awaitedssthem. We shouted with all our might, in the hope of frighteningssthe bird into letting go of its prey, but it merely gave a snortssor puff, as if of rage and then let fall upon our heads a heavysssack which proved to be filled with sand!’”ss“Stuff!” said the king.ss“‘It was just after this adventure that we encountered asscontinent of immense extent and prodigious solidity, but which,ssnevertheless, was supported entirely upon the back of a sky-bluesscow that had no fewer than four hundred horns.’” (*18)ss“That, now, I believe,” said the king, “because I have readsssomething of the kind before, in a book.”ss“‘We passed immediately beneath this continent, (swimming inssbetween the legs of the cow), and, after some hours, foundssourselves in a wonderful country indeed, which, I was informed byssthe man-animal, was his own native land, inhabited by things ofsshis own species. This elevated the man-animal very much in myssesteem, and in fact, I now began to feel ashamed of thesscontemptuous familiarity with which I had treated him; for Issfound that the man-animals in general were a nation of the mostsspowerful magicians, who lived with worms in their brain, (*19)sswhich, no doubt, served to stimulate them by their painfulsswrithings and wrigglings to the most miraculous efforts ofssimagination!’”ss“Nonsense!” said the king.ss“‘Among the magicians, were domesticated several animals of verysssingular kinds; for example, there was a huge horse whose bonessswere iron and whose blood was boiling water. In place of corn, hesshad black stones for his usual food; and yet, in spite of so hardssa diet, he was so strong and swift that he would drag a load moressweighty than the grandest temple in this city, at a ratesssurpassing that of the flight of most birds.’” (*20)ss“Twattle!” said the king.ss“‘I saw, also, among these people a hen without feathers, butssbigger than a camel; instead of flesh and bone she had iron andssbrick; her blood, like that of the horse, (to whom, in fact, shesswas nearly related,) was boiling water; and like him she atessnothing but wood or black stones. This hen brought forth veryssfrequently, a hundred chickens in the day; and, after birth, theysstook up their residence for several weeks within the stomach ofsstheir mother.’” (*21)ss“Fal lal!” said the king.ss“‘One of this nation of mighty conjurors created a man out ofssbrass and wood, and leather, and endowed him with such ingenuityssthat he would have beaten at chess, all the race of mankind withssthe exception of the great Caliph, Haroun Alraschid. (*22)ssAnother of these magi constructed (of like material) a creaturessthat put to shame even the genius of him who made it; for sossgreat were its reasoning powers that, in a second, it performedsscalculations of so vast an extent that they would have requiredssthe united labor of fifty thousand fleshy men for a year. (*23)ssBut a still more wonderful conjuror fashioned for himself assmighty thing that was neither man nor beast, but which had brainsssof lead, intermixed with a black matter like pitch, and fingersssthat it employed with such incredible speed and dexterity that itsswould have had no trouble in writing out twenty thousand copiesssof the Koran in an hour, and this with so exquisite a precision,ssthat in all the copies there should not be found one to vary fromssanother by the breadth of the finest hair. This thing was ofssprodigious strength, so that it erected or overthrew thessmightiest empires at a breath; but its powers were exercisedssequally for evil and for good.’”ss“Ridiculous!” said the king.ss“‘Among this nation of necromancers there was also one who had insshis veins the blood of the salamanders; for he made no scruple ofsssitting down to smoke his chibouc in a red-hot oven until hisssdinner was thoroughly roasted upon its floor. (*24) Another hadssthe faculty of converting the common metals into gold, withoutsseven looking at them during the process. (*25) Another had such assdelicacy of touch that he made a wire so fine as to be invisible.ss(*26) Another had such quickness of perception that he countedssall the separate motions of an elastic body, while it wasssspringing backward and forward at the rate of nine hundredssmillions of times in a second.’” (*27)ss“Absurd!” said the king.ss“‘Another of these magicians, by means of a fluid that nobodyssever yet saw, could make the corpses of his friends brandishsstheir arms, kick out their legs, fight, or even get up and dancessat his will. (*28) Another had cultivated his voice to so greatssan extent that he could have made himself heard from one end ofssthe world to the other. (*29) Another had so long an arm that hesscould sit down in Damascus and indite a letter at Bagdad—orssindeed at any distance whatsoever. (*30) Another commanded thesslightning to come down to him out of the heavens, and it came atsshis call; and served him for a plaything when it came. Anothersstook two loud sounds and out of them made a silence. Anotherssconstructed a deep darkness out of two brilliant lights. (*31)ssAnother made ice in a red-hot furnace. (*32) Another directed thesssun to paint his portrait, and the sun did. (*33) Another tookssthis luminary with the moon and the planets, and having firstssweighed them with scrupulous accuracy, probed into their depthsssand found out the solidity of the substance of which they weressmade. But the whole nation is, indeed, of so surprising assnecromantic ability, that not even their infants, nor theirsscommonest cats and dogs have any difficulty in seeing objectsssthat do not exist at all, or that for twenty millions of yearsssbefore the birth of the nation itself had been blotted out fromssthe face of creation.’” (*34)ss“Preposterous!” said the king.ss“‘The wives and daughters of these incomparably great and wisessmagi,’” continued Scheherazade, without being in any mannerssdisturbed by these frequent and most ungentlemanly interruptionssson the part of her husband—“‘the wives and daughters of thesesseminent conjurers are every thing that is accomplished andssrefined; and would be every thing that is interesting andssbeautiful, but for an unhappy fatality that besets them, and fromsswhich not even the miraculous powers of their husbands andssfathers has, hitherto, been adequate to save. Some fatalitiessscome in certain shapes, and some in others—but this of which Issspeak has come in the shape of a crotchet.’”ss“A what?” said the king.ss“‘A crotchet’” said Scheherazade. “‘One of the evil genii, whossare perpetually upon the watch to inflict ill, has put it intossthe heads of these accomplished ladies that the thing which wessdescribe as personal beauty consists altogether in thessprotuberance of the region which lies not very far below thesssmall of the back. Perfection of loveliness, they say, is in thessdirect ratio of the extent of this lump. Having been longsspossessed of this idea, and bolsters being cheap in that country,ssthe days have long gone by since it was possible to distinguish asswoman from a dromedary—’”ss“Stop!” said the king—“I can’t stand that, and I won’t. You havessalready given me a dreadful headache with your lies. The day,sstoo, I perceive, is beginning to break. How long have we beenssmarried?—my conscience is getting to be troublesome again. Andssthen that dromedary touch—do you take me for a fool? Upon thesswhole, you might as well get up and be throttled.”ssThese words, as I learn from the “Isitsöornot,” both grieved andssastonished Scheherazade; but, as she knew the king to be a man ofssscrupulous integrity, and quite unlikely to forfeit his word, shesssubmitted to her fate with a good grace. She derived, however,ssgreat consolation, (during the tightening of the bowstring,) fromssthe reflection that much of the history remained still untold,ssand that the petulance of her brute of a husband had reaped forsshim a most righteous reward, in depriving him of manyssinconceivable adventures.ssA DESCENT INTO THE MAELSTROM.ssThe ways of God in Nature, as in Providence, are not as our ways;ssnor are the models that we frame any way commensurate to thessvastness, profundity, and unsearchableness of His works, _which havessa depth in them greater than the well of Democritus_.

—_Joseph Glanville_.ssWe had now reached the summit of the loftiest crag. For somessminutes the old man seemed too much exhausted to speak.ss“Not long ago,” said he at length, “and I could have guided yousson this route as well as the youngest of my sons; but, aboutssthree years past, there happened to me an event such as neversshappened to mortal man—or at least such as no man ever survivedssto tell of—and the six hours of deadly terror which I thenssendured have broken me up body and soul. You suppose me a _very_ssold man—but I am not. It took less than a single day to changessthese hairs from a jetty black to white, to weaken my limbs, andssto unstring my nerves, so that I tremble at the least exertion,ssand am frightened at a shadow. Do you know I can scarcely lookssover this little cliff without getting giddy?”ssThe “little cliff,” upon whose edge he had so carelessly thrownsshimself down to rest that the weightier portion of his body hungssover it, while he was only kept from falling by the tenure of hissselbow on its extreme and slippery edge—this “little cliff” arose,ssa sheer unobstructed precipice of black shining rock, somessfifteen or sixteen hundred feet from the world of crags beneathssus. Nothing would have tempted me to within half a dozen yards ofssits brink. In truth so deeply was I excited by the perilousssposition of my companion, that I fell at full length upon thessground, clung to the shrubs around me, and dared not even glancessupward at the sky—while I struggled in vain to divest myself ofssthe idea that the very foundations of the mountain were in dangerssfrom the fury of the winds. It was long before I could reasonssmyself into sufficient courage to sit up and look out into thessdistance.ss“You must get over these fancies,” said the guide, “for I havessbrought you here that you might have the best possible view ofssthe scene of that event I mentioned—and to tell you the wholes 
 story with the spot just under your eye.”ss“We are now,” he continued, in that particularizing manner whichssdistinguished him—“we are now close upon the Norwegian coast—inssthe sixty-eighth degree of latitude—in the great province ofssNordland—and in the dreary district of Lofoden. The mountain uponsswhose top we sit is Helseggen, the Cloudy. Now raise yourself upssa little higher—hold on to the grass if you feel giddy—so—andsslook out, beyond the belt of vapor beneath us, into the sea.”ssI looked dizzily, and beheld a wide expanse of ocean, whosesswaters wore so inky a hue as to bring at once to my mind thessNubian geographer’s account of the _Mare Tenebrarum_. A panoramassmore deplorably desolate no human imagination can conceive. Tossthe right and left, as far as the eye could reach, there layssoutstretched, like ramparts of the world, lines of horridly blackssand beetling cliff, whose character of gloom was but the moressforcibly illustrated by the surf which reared high up against itssswhite and ghastly crest, howling and shrieking forever. Justssopposite the promontory upon whose apex we were placed, and at assdistance of some five or six miles out at sea, there was visiblessa small, bleak-looking island; or, more properly, its positionsswas discernible through the wilderness of surge in which it wasssenveloped. About two miles nearer the land, arose another ofsssmaller size, hideously craggy and barren, and encompassed atssvarious intervals by a cluster of dark rocks.ssThe appearance of the ocean, in the space between the moressdistant island and the shore, had something very unusual aboutssit. Although, at the time, so strong a gale was blowing landwardssthat a brig in the remote offing lay to under a double-reefedsstrysail, and constantly plunged her whole hull out of sight,ssstill there was here nothing like a regular swell, but only assshort, quick, angry cross dashing of water in every direction—assswell in the teeth of the wind as otherwise. Of foam there wassslittle except in the immediate vicinity of the rocks.ss“The island in the distance,” resumed the old man, “is called byssthe Norwegians Vurrgh. The one midway is Moskoe. That a mile tossthe northward is Ambaaren. Yonder are Islesen, Hotholm,ssKeildhelm, Suarven, and Buckholm. Farther off—between Moskoe andssVurrgh—are Otterholm, Flimen, Sandflesen, and Stockholm. Thesessare the true names of the places—but why it has been thoughtssnecessary to name them at all, is more than either you or I canssunderstand. Do you hear anything? Do you see any change in thesswater?”ssWe had now been about ten minutes upon the top of Helseggen, tosswhich we had ascended from the interior of Lofoden, so that wesshad caught no glimpse of the sea until it had burst upon us fromssthe summit. As the old man spoke, I became aware of a loud andssgradually increasing sound, like the moaning of a vast herd ofssbuffaloes upon an American prairie; and at the same moment Issperceived that what seamen term the _chopping_ character of thessocean beneath us, was rapidly changing into a current which setssto the eastward. Even while I gazed, this current acquired assmonstrous velocity. Each moment added to its speed—to itsssheadlong impetuosity. In five minutes the whole sea, as far asssVurrgh, was lashed into ungovernable fury; but it was betweenssMoskoe and the coast that the main uproar held its sway. Here thessvast bed of the waters, seamed and scarred into a thousandssconflicting channels, burst suddenly into phrensiedssconvulsion—heaving, boiling, hissing—gyrating in gigantic andssinnumerable vortices, and all whirling and plunging on to thesseastward with a rapidity which water never elsewhere assumesssexcept in precipitous descents.ssIn a few minutes more, there came over the scene another radicalssalteration. The general surface grew somewhat more smooth, andssthe whirlpools, one by one, disappeared, while prodigious streaksssof foam became apparent where none had been seen before. Thesessstreaks, at length, spreading out to a great distance, andssentering into combination, took unto themselves the gyratoryssmotion of the subsided vortices, and seemed to form the germ ofssanother more vast. Suddenly—very suddenly—this assumed a distinctssand definite existence, in a circle of more than a mile inssdiameter. The edge of the whirl was represented by a broad beltssof gleaming spray; but no particle of this slipped into the mouthssof the terrific funnel, whose interior, as far as the eye couldssfathom it, was a smooth, shining, and jet-black wall of water,ssinclined to the horizon at an angle of some forty-five degrees,ssspeeding dizzily round and round with a swaying and swelteringssmotion, and sending forth to the winds an appalling voice, halfssshriek, half roar, such as not even the mighty cataract ofssNiagara ever lifts up in its agony to Heaven.ssThe mountain trembled to its very base, and the rock rocked. Issthrew myself upon my face, and clung to the scant herbage in anssexcess of nervous agitation.ss“This,” said I at length, to the old man—“this _can_ be nothingsselse than the great whirlpool of the Maelström.”ss“So it is sometimes termed,” said he. “We Norwegians call it thessMoskoe-ström, from the island of Moskoe in the midway.”ssThe ordinary accounts of this vortex had by no means prepared messfor what I saw. That of Jonas Ramus, which is perhaps the mostsscircumstantial of any, cannot impart the faintest conceptionsseither of the magnificence, or of the horror of the scene—or ofssthe wild bewildering sense of _the novel_ which confounds thessbeholder. I am not sure from what point of view the writer inssquestion surveyed it, nor at what time; but it could neither havessbeen from the summit of Helseggen, nor during a storm. There aresssome passages of his description, nevertheless, which may bessquoted for their details, although their effect is exceedinglyssfeeble in conveying an impression of the spectacle.ss“Between Lofoden and Moskoe,” he says, “the depth of the water isssbetween thirty-six and forty fathoms; but on the other side,sstoward Ver (Vurrgh) this depth decreases so as not to afford assconvenient passage for a vessel, without the risk of splitting onssthe rocks, which happens even in the calmest weather. When it isssflood, the stream runs up the country between Lofoden and Moskoesswith a boisterous rapidity; but the roar of its impetuous ebb tossthe sea is scarce equalled by the loudest and most dreadfulsscataracts; the noise being heard several leagues off, and thessvortices or pits are of such an extent and depth, that if a shipsscomes within its attraction, it is inevitably absorbed andsscarried down to the bottom, and there beat to pieces against thessrocks; and when the water relaxes, the fragments thereof aressthrown up again. But these intervals of tranquility are only atssthe turn of the ebb and flood, and in calm weather, and last butssa quarter of an hour, its violence gradually returning. When thessstream is most boisterous, and its fury heightened by a storm, itssis dangerous to come within a Norway mile of it. Boats, yachts,ssand ships have been carried away by not guarding against itssbefore they were within its reach. It likewise happensssfrequently, that whales come too near the stream, and aressoverpowered by its violence; and then it is impossible tossdescribe their howlings and bellowings in their fruitlessssstruggles to disengage themselves. A bear once, attempting tossswim from Lofoden to Moskoe, was caught by the stream and bornessdown, while he roared terribly, so as to be heard on shore. Largessstocks of firs and pine trees, after being absorbed by thesscurrent, rise again broken and torn to such a degree as ifssbristles grew upon them. This plainly shows the bottom to consistssof craggy rocks, among which they are whirled to and fro. Thisssstream is regulated by the flux and reflux of the sea—it beingssconstantly high and low water every six hours. In the year 1645,ssearly in the morning of Sexagesima Sunday, it raged with suchssnoise and impetuosity that the very stones of the houses on thesscoast fell to the ground.”ssIn regard to the depth of the water, I could not see how thissscould have been ascertained at all in the immediate vicinity ofssthe vortex. The “forty fathoms” must have reference only tossportions of the channel close upon the shore either of Moskoe orssLofoden. The depth in the centre of the Moskoe-ström must bessimmeasurably greater; and no better proof of this fact isssnecessary than can be obtained from even the sidelong glance intossthe abyss of the whirl which may be had from the highest crag ofssHelseggen. Looking down from this pinnacle upon the howlingssPhlegethon below, I could not help smiling at the simplicity withsswhich the honest Jonas Ramus records, as a matter difficult ofssbelief, the anecdotes of the whales and the bears; for itssappeared to me, in fact, a self-evident thing, that the largestssship of the line in existence, coming within the influence ofssthat deadly attraction, could resist it as little as a featherssthe hurricane, and must disappear bodily and at once.ssThe attempts to account for the phenomenon—some of which, Issremember, seemed to me sufficiently plausible in perusal—now woressa very different and unsatisfactory aspect. The idea generallyssreceived is that this, as well as three smaller vortices amongssthe Ferroe islands, “have no other cause than the collision ofsswaves rising and falling, at flux and reflux, against a ridge ofssrocks and shelves, which confines the water so that itssprecipitates itself like a cataract; and thus the higher thessflood rises, the deeper must the fall be, and the natural resultssof all is a whirlpool or vortex, the prodigious suction of whichssis sufficiently known by lesser experiments.”—These are the wordsssof the Encyclopædia Britannica. Kircher and others imagine thatssin the centre of the channel of the Maelström is an abysssspenetrating the globe, and issuing in some very remote part—thessGulf of Bothnia being somewhat decidedly named in one instance.ssThis opinion, idle in itself, was the one to which, as I gazed,ssmy imagination most readily assented; and, mentioning it to thessguide, I was rather surprised to hear him say that, although itsswas the view almost universally entertained of the subject by thessNorwegians, it nevertheless was not his own. As to the formerssnotion he confessed his inability to comprehend it; and here Issagreed with him—for, however conclusive on paper, it becomesssaltogether unintelligible, and even absurd, amid the thunder ofssthe abyss.ss“You have had a good look at the whirl now,” said the old man,ss“and if you will creep round this crag, so as to get in its lee,ssand deaden the roar of the water, I will tell you a story thatsswill convince you I ought to know something of the Moskoe-ström.”ssI placed myself as desired, and he proceeded.ss“Myself and my two brothers once owned a schooner-rigged smack ofssabout seventy tons burthen, with which we were in the habit ofssfishing among the islands beyond Moskoe, nearly to Vurrgh. In allssviolent eddies at sea there is good fishing, at properssopportunities, if one has only the courage to attempt it; butssamong the whole of the Lofoden coastmen, we three were the onlyssones who made a regular business of going out to the islands, asssI tell you. The usual grounds are a great way lower down to thesssouthward. There fish can be got at all hours, without much risk,ssand therefore these places are preferred. The choice spots oversshere among the rocks, however, not only yield the finest variety,ssbut in far greater abundance; so that we often got in a singlessday, what the more timid of the craft could not scrape togetherssin a week. In fact, we made it a matter of desperatessspeculation—the risk of life standing instead of labor, andsscourage answering for capital.ss“We kept the smack in a cove about five miles higher up the coastssthan this; and it was our practice, in fine weather, to takessadvantage of the fifteen minutes’ slack to push across the mainsschannel of the Moskoe-ström, far above the pool, and then dropssdown upon anchorage somewhere near Otterholm, or Sandflesen,sswhere the eddies are not so violent as elsewhere. Here we used tossremain until nearly time for slack-water again, when we weighedssand made for home. We never set out upon this expedition withoutssa steady side wind for going and coming—one that we felt suresswould not fail us before our return—and we seldom made assmis-calculation upon this point. Twice, during six years, we weressforced to stay all night at anchor on account of a dead calm,sswhich is a rare thing indeed just about here; and once we had tossremain on the grounds nearly a week, starving to death, owing tossa gale which blew up shortly after our arrival, and made thesschannel too boisterous to be thought of. Upon this occasion wessshould have been driven out to sea in spite of everything, (forssthe whirlpools threw us round and round so violently, that, atsslength, we fouled our anchor and dragged it) if it had not beenssthat we drifted into one of the innumerable cross currents—heressto-day and gone to-morrow—which drove us under the lee of Flimen,sswhere, by good luck, we brought up.ss“I could not tell you the twentieth part of the difficulties wessencountered ‘on the grounds’—it is a bad spot to be in, even inssgood weather—but we made shift always to run the gauntlet of thessMoskoe-ström itself without accident; although at times my heartsshas been in my mouth when we happened to be a minute or so behindssor before the slack. The wind sometimes was not as strong as wessthought it at starting, and then we made rather less way than wesscould wish, while the current rendered the smack unmanageable. Mysseldest brother had a son eighteen years old, and I had two stoutssboys of my own. These would have been of great assistance at suchsstimes, in using the sweeps, as well as afterward in fishing—but,sssomehow, although we ran the risk ourselves, we had not the heartssto let the young ones get into the danger—for, after all is saidssand done, it _was_ a horrible danger, and that is the truth.ss“It is now within a few days of three years since what I am goingssto tell you occurred. It was on the tenth day of July, 18—, a daysswhich the people of this part of the world will never forget—forssit was one in which blew the most terrible hurricane that eversscame out of the heavens. And yet all the morning, and indeedssuntil late in the afternoon, there was a gentle and steady breezessfrom the south-west, while the sun shone brightly, so that thessoldest seaman among us could not have foreseen what was tossfollow.ss“The three of us—my two brothers and myself—had crossed over tossthe islands about two o’clock P. M., and had soon nearly loadedssthe smack with fine fish, which, we all remarked, were moressplenty that day than we had ever known them. It was just seven,ss_by my watch_, when we weighed and started for home, so as tossmake the worst of the Ström at slack water, which we knew wouldssbe at eight.ss“We set out with a fresh wind on our starboard quarter, and forsssome time spanked along at a great rate, never dreaming ofssdanger, for indeed we saw not the slightest reason to apprehendssit. All at once we were taken aback by a breeze from overssHelseggen. This was most unusual—something that had neversshappened to us before—and I began to feel a little uneasy,sswithout exactly knowing why. We put the boat on the wind, butsscould make no headway at all for the eddies, and I was upon thesspoint of proposing to return to the anchorage, when, lookingssastern, we saw the whole horizon covered with a singularsscopper-colored cloud that rose with the most amazing velocity.ss“In the meantime the breeze that had headed us off fell away, andsswe were dead becalmed, drifting about in every direction. Thisssstate of things, however, did not last long enough to give ussstime to think about it. In less than a minute the storm was uponssus—in less than two the sky was entirely overcast—and what withssthis and the driving spray, it became suddenly so dark that wesscould not see each other in the smack.ss“Such a hurricane as then blew it is folly to attempt describing.ssThe oldest seaman in Norway never experienced any thing like it.ssWe had let our sails go by the run before it cleverly took us;ssbut, at the first puff, both our masts went by the board as ifssthey had been sawed off—the mainmast taking with it my youngestssbrother, who had lashed himself to it for safety.ss“Our boat was the lightest feather of a thing that ever sat uponsswater. It had a complete flush deck, with only a small hatch nearssthe bow, and this hatch it had always been our custom to battenssdown when about to cross the Ström, by way of precaution againstssthe chopping seas. But for this circumstance we should havessfoundered at once—for we lay entirely buried for some moments.ssHow my elder brother escaped destruction I cannot say, for Issnever had an opportunity of ascertaining. For my part, as soon asssI had let the foresail run, I threw myself flat on deck, with myssfeet against the narrow gunwale of the bow, and with my handsssgrasping a ring-bolt near the foot of the fore-mast. It was meressinstinct that prompted me to do this—which was undoubtedly thessvery best thing I could have done—for I was too much flurried tossthink.ss“For some moments we were completely deluged, as I say, and allssthis time I held my breath, and clung to the bolt. When I couldssstand it no longer I raised myself upon my knees, still keepingsshold with my hands, and thus got my head clear. Presently oursslittle boat gave herself a shake, just as a dog does in comingssout of the water, and thus rid herself, in some measure, of thessseas. I was now trying to get the better of the stupor that hadsscome over me, and to collect my senses so as to see what was tossbe done, when I felt somebody grasp my arm. It was my elderssbrother, and my heart leaped for joy, for I had made sure that hesswas overboard—but the next moment all this joy was turned intosshorror—for he put his mouth close to my ear, and screamed out thessword ‘_Moskoe-ström!_’ss“No one ever will know what my feelings were at that moment. Issshook from head to foot as if I had had the most violent fit ofssthe ague. I knew what he meant by that one word well enough—Issknew what he wished to make me understand. With the wind that nowssdrove us on, we were bound for the whirl of the Ström, andssnothing could save us!ss“You perceive that in crossing the Ström _channel_, we alwayssswent a long way up above the whirl, even in the calmest weather,ssand then had to wait and watch carefully for the slack—but now wesswere driving right upon the pool itself, and in such a hurricanessas this! ‘To be sure,’ I thought, ‘we shall get there just aboutssthe slack—there is some little hope in that’—but in the nextssmoment I cursed myself for being so great a fool as to dream ofsshope at all. I knew very well that we were doomed, had we beenssten times a ninety-gun ship.ss“By this time the first fury of the tempest had spent itself, orssperhaps we did not feel it so much, as we scudded before it, butssat all events the seas, which at first had been kept down by thesswind, and lay flat and frothing, now got up into absolutessmountains. A singular change, too, had come over the heavens.ssAround in every direction it was still as black as pitch, butssnearly overhead there burst out, all at once, a circular rift ofssclear sky—as clear as I ever saw—and of a deep bright blue—andssthrough it there blazed forth the full moon with a lustre that Issnever before knew her to wear. She lit up every thing about ussswith the greatest distinctness—but, oh God, what a scene it wasssto light up!ss“I now made one or two attempts to speak to my brother—but, insssome manner which I could not understand, the din had sossincreased that I could not make him hear a single word, althoughssI screamed at the top of my voice in his ear. Presently he shooksshis head, looking as pale as death, and held up one of hisssfingers, as if to say _‘listen! ‘_ss“At first I could not make out what he meant—but soon a hideousssthought flashed upon me. I dragged my watch from its fob. It wasssnot going. I glanced at its face by the moonlight, and then burstssinto tears as I flung it far away into the ocean. _It had runssdown at seven o’clock! We were behind the time of the slack, andssthe whirl of the Ström was in full fury!_ss“When a boat is well built, properly trimmed, and not deep laden,ssthe waves in a strong gale, when she is going large, seem alwaysssto slip from beneath her—which appears very strange to asslandsman—and this is what is called _riding_, in sea phrase.ss“Well, so far we had ridden the swells very cleverly; butsspresently a gigantic sea happened to take us right under thesscounter, and bore us with it as it rose—up—up—as if into the sky.ssI would not have believed that any wave could rise so high. Andssthen down we came with a sweep, a slide, and a plunge, that madessme feel sick and dizzy, as if I was falling from some loftyssmountain-top in a dream. But while we were up I had thrown assquick glance around—and that one glance was all sufficient. I sawssour exact position in an instant. The Moskoe-Ström whirlpool wasssabout a quarter of a mile dead ahead—but no more like thessevery-day Moskoe-Ström than the whirl as you now see it, is likessa mill-race. If I had not known where we were, and what we had tossexpect, I should not have recognised the place at all. As it was,ssI involuntarily closed my eyes in horror. The lids clenchedssthemselves together as if in a spasm.ss“It could not have been more than two minutes afterward until wesssuddenly felt the waves subside, and were enveloped in foam. Thessboat made a sharp half turn to larboard, and then shot off in itsssnew direction like a thunderbolt. At the same moment the roaringssnoise of the water was completely drowned in a kind of shrillssshriek—such a sound as you might imagine given out by thesswaste-pipes of many thousand steam-vessels, letting off theirsssteam all together. We were now in the belt of surf that alwayssssurrounds the whirl; and I thought, of course, that anotherssmoment would plunge us into the abyss, down which we could onlysssee indistinctly on account of the amazing velocity with which wesswore borne along. The boat did not seem to sink into the water atssall, but to skim like an air-bubble upon the surface of thesssurge. Her starboard side was next the whirl, and on the larboardssarose the world of ocean we had left. It stood like a hugesswrithing wall between us and the horizon.ss“It may appear strange, but now, when we were in the very jaws ofssthe gulf, I felt more composed than when we were only approachingssit. Having made up my mind to hope no more, I got rid of a greatssdeal of that terror which unmanned me at first. I suppose it wasssdespair that strung my nerves.ss“It may look like boasting—but what I tell you is truth—I beganssto reflect how magnificent a thing it was to die in such assmanner, and how foolish it was in me to think of so paltry assconsideration as my own individual life, in view of so wonderfulssa manifestation of God’s power. I do believe that I blushed withssshame when this idea crossed my mind. After a little while Issbecame possessed with the keenest curiosity about the whirlssitself. I positively felt a _wish_ to explore its depths, even atssthe sacrifice I was going to make; and my principal grief wasssthat I should never be able to tell my old companions on shoressabout the mysteries I should see. These, no doubt, were singularssfancies to occupy a man’s mind in such extremity—and I have oftenssthought since, that the revolutions of the boat around the poolssmight have rendered me a little light-headed.ss“There was another circumstance which tended to restore myssself-possession; and this was the cessation of the wind, whichsscould not reach us in our present situation—for, as you sawssyourself, the belt of surf is considerably lower than the generalssbed of the ocean, and this latter now towered above us, a high,ssblack, mountainous ridge. If you have never been at sea in assheavy gale, you can form no idea of the confusion of mindssoccasioned by the wind and spray together. They blind, deafen,ssand strangle you, and take away all power of action orssreflection. But we were now, in a great measure, rid of thesessannoyances—just as death-condemned felons in prison are allowedsspetty indulgences, forbidden them while their doom is yetssuncertain.ss“How often we made the circuit of the belt it is impossible tosssay. We careered round and round for perhaps an hour, flyingssrather than floating, getting gradually more and more into thessmiddle of the surge, and then nearer and nearer to its horriblessinner edge. All this time I had never let go of the ring-bolt. Myssbrother was at the stern, holding on to a small empty water-casksswhich had been securely lashed under the coop of the counter, andsswas the only thing on deck that had not been swept overboard whenssthe gale first took us. As we approached the brink of the pit hesslet go his hold upon this, and made for the ring, from which, inssthe agony of his terror, he endeavored to force my hands, as itsswas not large enough to afford us both a secure grasp. I neverssfelt deeper grief than when I saw him attempt this act—although Issknew he was a madman when he did it—a raving maniac through sheerssfright. I did not care, however, to contest the point with him. Issknew it could make no difference whether either of us held on atssall; so I let him have the bolt, and went astern to the cask.ssThis there was no great difficulty in doing; for the smack flewssround steadily enough, and upon an even keel—only swaying to andssfro, with the immense sweeps and swelters of the whirl. Scarcelysshad I secured myself in my new position, when we gave a wildsslurch to starboard, and rushed headlong into the abyss. Issmuttered a hurried prayer to God, and thought all was over.ss“As I felt the sickening sweep of the descent, I hadssinstinctively tightened my hold upon the barrel, and closed mysseyes. For some seconds I dared not open them—while I expectedssinstant destruction, and wondered that I was not already in myssdeath-struggles with the water. But moment after moment elapsed.ssI still lived. The sense of falling had ceased; and the motion ofssthe vessel seemed much as it had been before, while in the beltssof foam, with the exception that she now lay more along. I tooksscourage, and looked once again upon the scene.ss“Never shall I forget the sensations of awe, horror, andssadmiration with which I gazed about me. The boat appeared to besshanging, as if by magic, midway down, upon the interior surfacessof a funnel vast in circumference, prodigious in depth, and whosessperfectly smooth sides might have been mistaken for ebony, butssfor the bewildering rapidity with which they spun around, and forssthe gleaming and ghastly radiance they shot forth, as the rays ofssthe full moon, from that circular rift amid the clouds which Isshave already described, streamed in a flood of golden glory alongssthe black walls, and far away down into the inmost recesses ofssthe abyss.ss“At first I was too much confused to observe anything accurately.ssThe general burst of terrific grandeur was all that I beheld.ssWhen I recovered myself a little, however, my gaze fellssinstinctively downward. In this direction I was able to obtain anssunobstructed view, from the manner in which the smack hung on thessinclined surface of the pool. She was quite upon an evensskeel—that is to say, her deck lay in a plane parallel with thatssof the water—but this latter sloped at an angle of more thanssforty-five degrees, so that we seemed to be lying upon ourssbeam-ends. I could not help observing, nevertheless, that I hadssscarcely more difficulty in maintaining my hold and footing inssthis situation, than if we had been upon a dead level; and this,ssI suppose, was owing to the speed at which we revolved.ss“The rays of the moon seemed to search the very bottom of thessprofound gulf; but still I could make out nothing distinctly, onssaccount of a thick mist in which everything there was enveloped,ssand over which there hung a magnificent rainbow, like that narrowssand tottering bridge which Mussulmen say is the only pathwayssbetween Time and Eternity. This mist, or spray, was no doubtssoccasioned by the clashing of the great walls of the funnel, asssthey all met together at the bottom—but the yell that went up tossthe Heavens from out of that mist, I dare not attempt tossdescribe.ss“Our first slide into the abyss itself, from the belt of foamssabove, had carried us a great distance down the slope; but ourssfarther descent was by no means proportionate. Round and round wessswept—not with any uniform movement—but in dizzying swings andssjerks, that sent us sometimes only a few hundred yards—sometimesssnearly the complete circuit of the whirl. Our progress downward,ssat each revolution, was slow, but very perceptible.ss“Looking about me upon the wide waste of liquid ebony on which wesswere thus borne, I perceived that our boat was not the onlyssobject in the embrace of the whirl. Both above and below us weressvisible fragments of vessels, large masses of building timber andsstrunks of trees, with many smaller articles, such as pieces ofsshouse furniture, broken boxes, barrels and staves. I have alreadyssdescribed the unnatural curiosity which had taken the place of myssoriginal terrors. It appeared to grow upon me as I drew nearerssand nearer to my dreadful doom. I now began to watch, with assstrange interest, the numerous things that floated in oursscompany. I _must_ have been delirious, for I even soughtss_amusement_ in speculating upon the relative velocities of theirssseveral descents toward the foam below. ‘This fir tree,’ I foundssmyself at one time saying, ‘will certainly be the next thing thatsstakes the awful plunge and disappears,’—and then I wasssdisappointed to find that the wreck of a Dutch merchant shipssovertook it and went down before. At length, after making severalssguesses of this nature, and being deceived in all—this fact—thessfact of my invariable miscalculation, set me upon a train ofssreflection that made my limbs again tremble, and my heart beatssheavily once more.ss“It was not a new terror that thus affected me, but the dawn of assmore exciting _hope_. This hope arose partly from memory, andsspartly from present observation. I called to mind the greatssvariety of buoyant matter that strewed the coast of Lofoden,sshaving been absorbed and then thrown forth by the Moskoe-ström.ssBy far the greater number of the articles were shattered in thessmost extraordinary way—so chafed and roughened as to have thessappearance of being stuck full of splinters—but then I distinctlyssrecollected that there were _some_ of them which were notssdisfigured at all. Now I could not account for this differencessexcept by supposing that the roughened fragments were the onlyssones which had been _completely absorbed_—that the others hadssentered the whirl at so late a period of the tide, or, for somessreason, had descended so slowly after entering, that they did notssreach the bottom before the turn of the flood came, or of thessebb, as the case might be. I conceived it possible, in eitherssinstance, that they might thus be whirled up again to the levelssof the ocean, without undergoing the fate of those which had beenssdrawn in more early, or absorbed more rapidly. I made, also,ssthree important observations. The first was, that, as a generalssrule, the larger the bodies were, the more rapid theirssdescent—the second, that, between two masses of equal extent, thessone spherical, and the other _of any other shape_, thesssuperiority in speed of descent was with the sphere—the third,ssthat, between two masses of equal size, the one cylindrical, andssthe other of any other shape, the cylinder was absorbed the moressslowly. Since my escape, I have had several conversations on thissssubject with an old school-master of the district; and it wasssfrom him that I learned the use of the words ‘cylinder’ andss‘sphere.’ He explained to me—although I have forgotten thessexplanation—how what I observed was, in fact, the naturalssconsequence of the forms of the floating fragments—and showed messhow it happened that a cylinder, swimming in a vortex, offeredssmore resistance to its suction, and was drawn in with greaterssdifficulty than an equally bulky body, of any form whatever. (*1)ss“There was one startling circumstance which went a great way inssenforcing these observations, and rendering me anxious to turnssthem to account, and this was that, at every revolution, wesspassed something like a barrel, or else the yard or the mast of assvessel, while many of these things, which had been on our levelsswhen I first opened my eyes upon the wonders of the whirlpool,sswere now high up above us, and seemed to have moved but littlessfrom their original station.ss“I no longer hesitated what to do. I resolved to lash myselfsssecurely to the water cask upon which I now held, to cut it loosessfrom the counter, and to throw myself with it into the water. Issattracted my brother’s attention by signs, pointed to thessfloating barrels that came near us, and did everything in mysspower to make him understand what I was about to do. I thought atsslength that he comprehended my design—but, whether this was thesscase or not, he shook his head despairingly, and refused to movessfrom his station by the ring-bolt. It was impossible to reachsshim; the emergency admitted of no delay; and so, with a bitterssstruggle, I resigned him to his fate, fastened myself to the caskssby means of the lashings which secured it to the counter, andssprecipitated myself with it into the sea, without anotherssmoment’s hesitation.ss“The result was precisely what I had hoped it might be. As it isssmyself who now tell you this tale—as you see that I _did_ssescape—and as you are already in possession of the mode in whichssthis escape was effected, and must therefore anticipate all thatssI have farther to say—I will bring my story quickly tossconclusion. It might have been an hour, or thereabout, after myssquitting the smack, when, having descended to a vast distancessbeneath me, it made three or four wild gyrations in rapidsssuccession, and, bearing my loved brother with it, plungedssheadlong, at once and forever, into the chaos of foam below. Thessbarrel to which I was attached sunk very little farther than halfssthe distance between the bottom of the gulf and the spot at whichssI leaped overboard, before a great change took place in thesscharacter of the whirlpool. The slope of the sides of the vastssfunnel became momently less and less steep. The gyrations of thesswhirl grew, gradually, less and less violent. By degrees, thessfroth and the rainbow disappeared, and the bottom of the gulfssseemed slowly to uprise. The sky was clear, the winds had gonessdown, and the full moon was setting radiantly in the west, when Issfound myself on the surface of the ocean, in full view of thessshores of Lofoden, and above the spot where the pool of thessMoskoe-ström _had been_. It was the hour of the slack—but the seassstill heaved in mountainous waves from the effects of thesshurricane. I was borne violently into the channel of the Ström,ssand in a few minutes was hurried down the coast into thess‘grounds’ of the fishermen. A boat picked me up—exhausted fromssfatigue—and (now that the danger was removed) speechless from thessmemory of its horror. Those who drew me on board were my oldssmates and daily companions—but they knew me no more than theysswould have known a traveller from the spirit-land. My hair whichsshad been raven-black the day before, was as white as you see itssnow. They say too that the whole expression of my countenance hadsschanged. I told them my story—they did not believe it. I now tellssit to _you_—and I can scarcely expect you to put more faith in itssthan did the merry fishermen of Lofoden.”ssVON KEMPELEN AND HIS DISCOVERYssAfter the very minute and elaborate paper by Arago, to sayssnothing of the summary in ‘Silliman’s Journal,’ with the detailedssstatement just published by Lieutenant Maury, it will not besssupposed, of course, that in offering a few hurried remarks inssreference to Von Kempelen’s discovery, I have any design to lookssat the subject in a scientific point of view. My object issssimply, in the first place, to say a few words of Von Kempelensshimself (with whom, some years ago, I had the honor of a slightsspersonal acquaintance), since every thing which concerns him mustssnecessarily, at this moment, be of interest; and, in the secondssplace, to look in a general way, and speculatively, at thessresults of the discovery.ssIt may be as well, however, to premise the cursory observationssswhich I have to offer, by denying, very decidedly, what seems tossbe a general impression (gleaned, as usual in a case of thissskind, from the newspapers), viz.: that this discovery, astoundingssas it unquestionably is, is unanticipated.ssBy reference to the ‘Diary of Sir Humphrey Davy’ (Cottle andssMunroe, London, pp. 150), it will be seen at pp. 53 and 82, thatssthis illustrious chemist had not only conceived the idea now inssquestion, but had actually made no inconsiderable progress,ssexperimentally, in the very identical analysis now sosstriumphantly brought to an issue by Von Kempelen, who although hessmakes not the slightest allusion to it, is, without doubt (I sayssit unhesitatingly, and can prove it, if required), indebted tossthe ‘Diary’ for at least the first hint of his own undertaking.ssThe paragraph from the ‘Courier and Enquirer,’ which is now goingssthe rounds of the press, and which purports to claim thessinvention for a Mr. Kissam, of Brunswick, Maine, appears to me, Issconfess, a little apocryphal, for several reasons; although theressis nothing either impossible or very improbable in the statementssmade. I need not go into details. My opinion of the paragraph isssfounded principally upon its manner. It does not look true.ssPersons who are narrating facts, are seldom so particular as Mr.ssKissam seems to be, about day and date and precise location.ssBesides, if Mr. Kissam actually did come upon the discovery hesssays he did, at the period designated—nearly eight years ago—howsshappens it that he took no steps, on the instant, to reap thessimmense benefits which the merest bumpkin must have known wouldsshave resulted to him individually, if not to the world at large,ssfrom the discovery? It seems to me quite incredible that any manssof common understanding could have discovered what Mr. Kissamsssays he did, and yet have subsequently acted so like a baby—sosslike an owl—as Mr. Kissam admits that he did. By-the-way, who isssMr. Kissam? and is not the whole paragraph in the ‘Courier andssEnquirer’ a fabrication got up to ‘make a talk’? It must bessconfessed that it has an amazingly moon-hoaxy-air. Very littlessdependence is to be placed upon it, in my humble opinion; and ifssI were not well aware, from experience, how very easily men ofssscience are mystified, on points out of their usual range ofssinquiry, I should be profoundly astonished at finding so eminentssa chemist as Professor Draper, discussing Mr. Kissam’s (or is itssMr. Quizzem’s?) pretensions to the discovery, in so serious asstone.ssBut to return to the ‘Diary’ of Sir Humphrey Davy. This pamphletsswas not designed for the public eye, even upon the decease of thesswriter, as any person at all conversant with authorship maysssatisfy himself at once by the slightest inspection of the style.ssAt page 13, for example, near the middle, we read, in referencessto his researches about the protoxide of azote: ‘In less thansshalf a minute the respiration being continued, diminishedssgradually and were succeeded by analogous to gentle pressure onssall the muscles.’ That the respiration was not ‘diminished,’ isssnot only clear by the subsequent context, but by the use of thessplural, ‘were.’ The sentence, no doubt, was thus intended: ‘Inssless than half a minute, the respiration [being continued, thesessfeelings] diminished gradually, and were succeeded by [asssensation] analogous to gentle pressure on all the muscles.’ Asshundred similar instances go to show that the MS. sossinconsiderately published, was merely a rough note-book, meantssonly for the writer’s own eye, but an inspection of the pamphletsswill convince almost any thinking person of the truth of mysssuggestion. The fact is, Sir Humphrey Davy was about the last manssin the world to commit himself on scientific topics. Not only hadsshe a more than ordinary dislike to quackery, but he was morbidlyssafraid of appearing empirical; so that, however fully he mightsshave been convinced that he was on the right track in the matterssnow in question, he would never have spoken out, until he hadssevery thing ready for the most practical demonstration. I verilyssbelieve that his last moments would have been rendered wretched,sscould he have suspected that his wishes in regard to burning thisss‘Diary’ (full of crude speculations) would have been unattendedssto; as, it seems, they were. I say ‘his wishes,’ for that hessmeant to include this note-book among the miscellaneous papersssdirected ‘to be burnt,’ I think there can be no manner of doubt.ssWhether it escaped the flames by good fortune or by bad, yetssremains to be seen. That the passages quoted above, with thessother similar ones referred to, gave Von Kempelen the hint, I dossnot in the slightest degree question; but I repeat, it yetssremains to be seen whether this momentous discovery itselfss(momentous under any circumstances) will be of service orssdisservice to mankind at large. That Von Kempelen and hisssimmediate friends will reap a rich harvest, it would be folly tossdoubt for a moment. They will scarcely be so weak as not toss‘realize,’ in time, by large purchases of houses and land, withssother property of intrinsic value.ssIn the brief account of Von Kempelen which appeared in the ‘HomessJournal,’ and has since been extensively copied, severalssmisapprehensions of the German original seem to have been made byssthe translator, who professes to have taken the passage from asslate number of the Presburg ‘Schnellpost.’ ‘Viele’ has evidentlyssbeen misconceived (as it often is), and what the translatorssrenders by ‘sorrows,’ is probably ‘lieden,’ which, in its truessversion, ‘sufferings,’ would give a totally different complexionssto the whole account; but, of course, much of this is merelyssguess, on my part.ssVon Kempelen, however, is by no means ‘a misanthrope,’ inssappearance, at least, whatever he may be in fact. My acquaintancesswith him was casual altogether; and I am scarcely warranted insssaying that I know him at all; but to have seen and conversedsswith a man of so _prodigious_ a notoriety as he has attained, orss_will_ attain in a few days, is not a small matter, as times go.ss“The Literary World” speaks of him, confidently, as a native ofssPresburg (misled, perhaps, by the account in “The Home Journal”)ssbut I am pleased in being able to state _positively_, since Isshave it from his own lips, that he was born in Utica, in thessState of New York, although both his parents, I believe, are ofssPresburg descent. The family is connected, in some way, withssMäelzel, of Automaton-chess-player memory. In person, he is shortssand stout, with large, _fat_, blue eyes, sandy hair and whiskers,ssa wide but pleasing mouth, fine teeth, and I think a Roman nose.ssThere is some defect in one of his feet. His address is frank,ssand his whole manner noticeable for bonhomie. Altogether, hesslooks, speaks, and acts as little like ‘a misanthrope’ as any manssI ever saw. We were fellow-sojourners for a week about six yearsssago, at Earl’s Hotel, in Providence, Rhode Island; and I presumessthat I conversed with him, at various times, for some three orssfour hours altogether. His principal topics were those of thessday; and nothing that fell from him led me to suspect hisssscientific attainments. He left the hotel before me, intending tossgo to New York, and thence to Bremen; it was in the latter cityssthat his great discovery was first made public; or, rather, itsswas there that he was first suspected of having made it. This isssabout all that I personally know of the now immortal VonssKempelen; but I have thought that even these few details wouldsshave interest for the public.ssThere can be little question that most of the marvellous rumorsssafloat about this affair are pure inventions, entitled to aboutssas much credit as the story of Aladdin’s lamp; and yet, in a casessof this kind, as in the case of the discoveries in California, itssis clear that the truth may be stranger than fiction. Thessfollowing anecdote, at least, is so well authenticated, that wessmay receive it implicitly.ssVon Kempelen had never been even tolerably well off during hisssresidence at Bremen; and often, it was well known, he had beenssput to extreme shifts in order to raise trifling sums. When thessgreat excitement occurred about the forgery on the house ofssGutsmuth & Co., suspicion was directed toward Von Kempelen, onssaccount of his having purchased a considerable property inssGasperitch Lane, and his refusing, when questioned, to explainsshow he became possessed of the purchase money. He was at lengthssarrested, but nothing decisive appearing against him, was in thessend set at liberty. The police, however, kept a strict watch uponsshis movements, and thus discovered that he left home frequently,sstaking always the same road, and invariably giving his watchersssthe slip in the neighborhood of that labyrinth of narrow andsscrooked passages known by the flash name of the ‘Dondergat.’ssFinally, by dint of great perseverance, they traced him to assgarret in an old house of seven stories, in an alley calledssFlatzplatz,—and, coming upon him suddenly, found him, as theyssimagined, in the midst of his counterfeiting operations. Hisssagitation is represented as so excessive that the officers hadssnot the slightest doubt of his guilt. After hand-cuffing him,ssthey searched his room, or rather rooms, for it appears hessoccupied all the mansarde.ssOpening into the garret where they caught him, was a closet, tenssfeet by eight, fitted up with some chemical apparatus, of whichssthe object has not yet been ascertained. In one corner of thesscloset was a very small furnace, with a glowing fire in it, andsson the fire a kind of duplicate crucible—two crucibles connectedssby a tube. One of these crucibles was nearly full of lead in assstate of fusion, but not reaching up to the aperture of the tube,sswhich was close to the brim. The other crucible had some liquidssin it, which, as the officers entered, seemed to be furiouslyssdissipating in vapor. They relate that, on finding himself taken,ssKempelen seized the crucibles with both hands (which were encasedssin gloves that afterwards turned out to be asbestic), and threwssthe contents on the tiled floor. It was now that they hand-cuffedsshim; and before proceeding to ransack the premises they searchedsshis person, but nothing unusual was found about him, excepting asspaper parcel, in his coat-pocket, containing what was afterwardssascertained to be a mixture of antimony and some unknownsssubstance, in nearly, but not quite, equal proportions. Allssattempts at analyzing the unknown substance have, so far, failed,ssbut that it will ultimately be analyzed, is not to be doubted.ssPassing out of the closet with their prisoner, the officers wentssthrough a sort of ante-chamber, in which nothing material wasssfound, to the chemist’s sleeping-room. They here rummaged somessdrawers and boxes, but discovered only a few papers, of nossimportance, and some good coin, silver and gold. At length,sslooking under the bed, they saw a large, common hair trunk,sswithout hinges, hasp, or lock, and with the top lying carelesslyssacross the bottom portion. Upon attempting to draw this trunk outssfrom under the bed, they found that, with their united strengthss(there were three of them, all powerful men), they ‘could notssstir it one inch.’ Much astonished at this, one of them crawledssunder the bed, and looking into the trunk, said:ss‘No wonder we couldn’t move it—why it’s full to the brim of oldssbits of brass!’ssPutting his feet, now, against the wall so as to get a goodsspurchase, and pushing with all his force, while his companionssspulled with all theirs, the trunk, with much difficulty, was slidssout from under the bed, and its contents examined. The supposedssbrass with which it was filled was all in small, smooth pieces,ssvarying from the size of a pea to that of a dollar; but thesspieces were irregular in shape, although more or lessssflat-looking, upon the whole, “very much as lead looks whenssthrown upon the ground in a molten state, and there suffered tossgrow cool.” Now, not one of these officers for a moment suspectedssthis metal to be anything _but_ brass. The idea of its beingss_gold_ never entered their brains, of course; how _could_ such asswild fancy have entered it? And their astonishment may be wellssconceived, when the next day it became known, all over Bremen,ssthat the “lot of brass” which they had carted so contemptuouslyssto the police office, without putting themselves to the troublessof pocketing the smallest scrap, was not only gold—real gold—butssgold far finer than any employed in coinage—gold, in fact,ssabsolutely pure, virgin, without the slightest appreciable alloy.ssI need not go over the details of Von Kempelen’s confession (asssfar as it went) and release, for these are familiar to thesspublic. That he has actually realized, in spirit and in effect,ssif not to the letter, the old chimaera of the philosopher’sssstone, no sane person is at liberty to doubt. The opinions ofssArago are, of course, entitled to the greatest consideration; butsshe is by no means infallible; and what he says of bismuth, in hisssreport to the Academy, must be taken _cum grano salis_. Thesssimple truth is, that up to this period all analysis has failed;ssand until Von Kempelen chooses to let us have the key to his ownsspublished enigma, it is more than probable that the matter willssremain, for years, in statu quo. All that as yet can fairly besssaid to be known is, that ‘Pure gold can be made at will, andssvery readily from lead in connection with certain othersssubstances, in kind and in proportions, unknown.’ssSpeculation, of course, is busy as to the immediate and ultimatessresults of this discovery—a discovery which few thinking personssswill hesitate in referring to an increased interest in the matterssof gold generally, by the late developments in California; andssthis reflection brings us inevitably to another—the exceedingssinopportuneness of Von Kempelen’s analysis. If many weressprevented from adventuring to California, by the meressapprehension that gold would so materially diminish in value, onssaccount of its plentifulness in the mines there, as to render thessspeculation of going so far in search of it a doubtful one—whatssimpression will be wrought now, upon the minds of those about tossemigrate, and especially upon the minds of those actually in thessmineral region, by the announcement of this astounding discoveryssof Von Kempelen? a discovery which declares, in so many words,ssthat beyond its intrinsic worth for manufacturing purposesss(whatever that worth may be), gold now is, or at least soon willssbe (for it cannot be supposed that Von Kempelen can long retainsshis secret), of no greater value than lead, and of far inferiorssvalue to silver. It is, indeed, exceedingly difficult tossspeculate prospectively upon the consequences of the discovery,ssbut one thing may be positively maintained—that the announcementssof the discovery six months ago would have had material influencessin regard to the settlement of California.ssIn Europe, as yet, the most noticeable results have been a risessof two hundred per cent. in the price of lead, and nearlysstwenty-five per cent. that of silver.ssMESMERIC REVELATIONssWhatever doubt may still envelop the _rationale_ of mesmerism, its
startling _facts_ are now almost universally admitted. Of these latter,
those who doubt, are your mere doubters by profession—an unprofitable
and disreputable tribe. There can be no more absolute waste of time
than the attempt to _prove_, at the present day, that man, by mere
exercise of will, can so impress his fellow, as to cast him into an
abnormal condition, of which the phenomena resemble very closely those
of _death_, or at least resemble them more nearly than they do the
phenomena of any other normal condition within our cognizance; that,
while in this state, the person so impressed employs only with effort,
and then feebly, the external organs of sense, yet perceives, with
keenly refined perception, and through channels supposed unknown,
matters beyond the scope of the physical organs; that, moreover, his
intellectual faculties are wonderfully exalted and invigorated; that
his sympathies with the person so impressing him are profound; and,
finally, that his susceptibility to the impression increases with its
frequency, while, in the same proportion, the peculiar phenomena
elicited are more extended and more _pronounced_.

I say that these—which are the laws of mesmerism in its general
features—it would be supererogation to demonstrate; nor shall I inflict
upon my readers so needless a demonstration; to-day. My purpose at
present is a very different one indeed. I am impelled, even in the
teeth of a world of prejudice, to detail without comment the very
remarkable substance of a colloquy, occurring between a sleep-waker and
myself.

I had been long in the habit of mesmerizing the person in question (Mr.
Vankirk), and the usual acute susceptibility and exaltation of the
mesmeric perception had supervened. For many months he had been
laboring under confirmed phthisis, the more distressing effects of
which had been relieved by my manipulations; and on the night of
Wednesday, the fifteenth instant, I was summoned to his bedside.

The invalid was suffering with acute pain in the region of the heart,
and breathed with great difficulty, having all the ordinary symptoms of
asthma. In spasms such as these he had usually found relief from the
application of mustard to the nervous centres, but to-night this had
been attempted in vain.

As I entered his room he greeted me with a cheerful smile, and although
evidently in much bodily pain, appeared to be, mentally, quite at ease.

“I sent for you to-night,” he said, “not so much to administer to my
bodily ailment, as to satisfy me concerning certain psychal impressions
which, of late, have occasioned me much anxiety and surprise. I need
not tell you how sceptical I have hitherto been on the topic of the
soul’s immortality. I cannot deny that there has always existed, as if
in that very soul which I have been denying, a vague half-sentiment of
its own existence. But this half-sentiment at no time amounted to
conviction. With it my reason had nothing to do. All attempts at
logical inquiry resulted, indeed, in leaving me more sceptical than
before. I had been advised to study Cousin. I studied him in his own
works as well as in those of his European and American echoes. The
‘Charles Elwood’ of Mr. Brownson, for example, was placed in my hands.
I read it with profound attention. Throughout I found it logical, but
the portions which were not _merely_ logical were unhappily the initial
arguments of the disbelieving hero of the book. In his summing up it
seemed evident to me that the reasoner had not even succeeded in
convincing himself. His end had plainly forgotten his beginning, like
the government of Trinculo. In short, I was not long in perceiving that
if man is to be intellectually convinced of his own immortality, he
will never be so convinced by the mere abstractions which have been so
long the fashion of the moralists of England, of France, and of
Germany. Abstractions may amuse and exercise, but take no hold on the
mind. Here upon earth, at least, philosophy, I am persuaded, will
always in vain call upon us to look upon qualities as things. The will
may assent—the soul—the intellect, never.

“I repeat, then, that I only half felt, and never intellectually
believed. But latterly there has been a certain deepening of the
feeling, until it has come so nearly to resemble the acquiescence of
reason, that I find it difficult to distinguish between the two. I am
enabled, too, plainly to trace this effect to the mesmeric influence. I
cannot better explain my meaning than by the hypothesis that the
mesmeric exaltation enables me to perceive a train of ratiocination
which, in my abnormal existence, convinces, but which, in full
accordance with the mesmeric phenomena, does not extend, except through
its _effect_, into my normal condition. In sleep-waking, the reasoning
and its conclusion—the cause and its effect—are present together. In my
natural state, the cause vanishing, the effect only, and perhaps only
partially, remains.

“These considerations have led me to think that some good results might
ensue from a series of well-directed questions propounded to me while
mesmerized. You have often observed the profound self-cognizance
evinced by the sleep-waker—the extensive knowledge he displays upon all
points relating to the mesmeric condition itself; and from this
self-cognizance may be deduced hints for the proper conduct of a
catechism.”

I consented of course to make this experiment.  A few passes threw Mr.
Vankirk into the mesmeric sleep. His breathing became immediately more
easy, and he seemed to suffer no physical uneasiness. The following
conversation then ensued:—V. in the dialogue representing the patient,
and P. myself.ss_P._ Are you asleep?ss_V._ Yes—no; I would rather sleep more soundly.ss_P._ [_After a few more passes._] Do you sleep now?ss_V._ Yes.ss_P._ How do you think your present illness will result?ss_V._ [_After a long hesitation and speaking as if with effort_.]ssI must die.ss_P._ Does the idea of death afflict you?ss_V._ [_Very quickly_.] No—no!ss_P._ Are you pleased with the prospect?ss_V._ If I were awake I should like to die, but now it is nossmatter. The mesmeric condition is so near death as to content me.ss_P._ I wish you would explain yourself, Mr. Vankirk.ss_V._ I am willing to do so, but it requires more effort than Issfeel able to make. You do not question me properly.ss_P._ What then shall I ask?ss_V._ You must begin at the beginning.ss_P._ The beginning! But where is the beginning?ss_V._ You know that the beginning is GOD. [_This was said in asslow, fluctuating tone, and with every sign of the most profoundssveneration_.]ss_P._ What then, is God?ss_V._ [_Hesitating for many minutes._] I cannot tell.ss_P._ Is not God spirit?ss_V._ While I was awake I knew what you meant by “spirit,” but nowssit seems only a word—such, for instance, as truth, beauty—assquality, I mean.ss_P._ Is not God immaterial?ss_V._ There is no immateriality—it is a mere word. That which isssnot matter, is not at all—unless qualities are things.ss_P._ Is God, then, material?ss_V._ No. [_This reply startled me very much._]ss_P._ What, then, is he?ss_V._ [_After a long pause, and mutteringly._] I see—but it is assthing difficult to tell. [_Another long pause._] He is notssspirit, for he exists. Nor is he matter, as _you understand it_.ssBut there are _gradations_ of matter of which man knows nothing;ssthe grosser impelling the finer, the finer pervading the grosser.ssThe atmosphere, for example, impels the electric principle, whilessthe electric principle permeates the atmosphere. These gradationsssof matter increase in rarity or fineness, until we arrive at assmatter _unparticled_—without particles—indivisible—_one;_ andsshere the law of impulsion and permeation is modified. Thessultimate, or unparticled matter, not only permeates all thingsssbut impels all things; and thus _is_ all things within itself.ssThis matter is God. What men attempt to embody in the wordss“thought,” is this matter in motion.ss_P._ The metaphysicians maintain that all action is reducible tossmotion and thinking, and that the latter is the origin of thessformer.ss_V._ Yes; and I now see the confusion of idea. Motion is thessaction of _mind_, not of _thinking_. The unparticled matter, orssGod, in quiescence, is (as nearly as we can conceive it) what mensscall mind. And the power of self-movement (equivalent in effectssto human volition) is, in the unparticled matter, the result ofssits unity and omniprevalence; _how_ I know not, and now clearlysssee that I shall never know. But the unparticled matter, set inssmotion by a law, or quality, existing within itself, is thinking.ss_P._ Can you give me no more precise idea of what you term thessunparticled matter?ss_V._ The matters of which man is cognizant escape the senses inssgradation. We have, for example, a metal, a piece of wood, a dropssof water, the atmosphere, a gas, caloric, electricity, thessluminiferous ether. Now we call all these things matter, andssembrace all matter in one general definition; but in spite ofssthis, there can be no two ideas more essentially distinct thanssthat which we attach to a metal, and that which we attach to thessluminiferous ether. When we reach the latter, we feel an almostssirresistible inclination to class it with spirit, or withssnihility. The only consideration which restrains us is ourssconception of its atomic constitution; and here, even, we have tossseek aid from our notion of an atom, as something possessing inssinfinite minuteness, solidity, palpability, weight. Destroy thessidea of the atomic constitution and we should no longer be ablessto regard the ether as an entity, or at least as matter. For wantssof a better word we might term it spirit. Take, now, a stepssbeyond the luminiferous ether—conceive a matter as much more raressthan the ether, as this ether is more rare than the metal, and wessarrive at once (in spite of all the school dogmas) at a uniquessmass—an unparticled matter. For although we may admit infinitesslittleness in the atoms themselves, the infinitude of littlenessssin the spaces between them is an absurdity. There will be asspoint—there will be a degree of rarity, at which, if the atomsssare sufficiently numerous, the interspaces must vanish, and thessmass absolutely coalesce. But the consideration of the atomicssconstitution being now taken away, the nature of the massssinevitably glides into what we conceive of spirit. It is clear,sshowever, that it is as fully matter as before. The truth is, itssis impossible to conceive spirit, since it is impossible tossimagine what is not. When we flatter ourselves that we havessformed its conception, we have merely deceived our understandingssby the consideration of infinitely rarified matter.ss_P._ There seems to me an insurmountable objection to the idea ofssabsolute coalescence;—and that is the very slight resistancessexperienced by the heavenly bodies in their revolutions throughssspace—a resistance now ascertained, it is true, to exist inss_some_ degree, but which is, nevertheless, so slight as to havessbeen quite overlooked by the sagacity even of Newton. We knowssthat the resistance of bodies is, chiefly, in proportion to theirssdensity. Absolute coalescence is absolute density. Where theressare no interspaces, there can be no yielding. An ether,ssabsolutely dense, would put an infinitely more effectual stop tossthe progress of a star than would an ether of adamant or of iron.ss_V._ Your objection is answered with an ease which is nearly inssthe ratio of its apparent unanswerability.—As regards thessprogress of the star, it can make no difference whether the starsspasses through the ether _or the ether through it_. There is nossastronomical error more unaccountable than that which reconcilesssthe known retardation of the comets with the idea of theirsspassage through an ether: for, however rare this ether besssupposed, it would put a stop to all sidereal revolution in assvery far briefer period than has been admitted by thosessastronomers who have endeavored to slur over a point which theyssfound it impossible to comprehend. The retardation actuallyssexperienced is, on the other hand, about that which might bessexpected from the _friction_ of the ether in the instantaneoussspassage through the orb. In the one case, the retarding force isssmomentary and complete within itself—in the other it is endlesslyssaccumulative.ss_P._ But in all this—in this identification of mere matter withssGod—is there nothing of irreverence? [_I was forced to repeatssthis question before the sleep-waker fully comprehended myssmeaning_.]ss_V._ Can you say _why_ matter should be less reverenced thanssmind? But you forget that the matter of which I speak is, in allssrespects, the very “mind” or “spirit” of the schools, so far asssregards its high capacities, and is, moreover, the “matter” ofssthese schools at the same time. God, with all the powersssattributed to spirit, is but the perfection of matter.ss_P._ You assert, then, that the unparticled matter, in motion, isssthought?ss_V._ In general, this motion is the universal thought of thessuniversal mind. This thought creates. All created things are butssthe thoughts of God.ss_P._ You say, “in general.”ss_V._ Yes. The universal mind is God. For new individualities,ss_matter_ is necessary.ss_P._ But you now speak of “mind” and “matter” as do thessmetaphysicians.ss_V._ Yes—to avoid confusion. When I say “mind,” I mean thessunparticled or ultimate matter; by “matter,” I intend all else.ss_P._ You were saying that “for new individualities matter isssnecessary.”ss_V._ Yes; for mind, existing unincorporate, is merely God. Tosscreate individual, thinking beings, it was necessary to incarnatessportions of the divine mind. Thus man is individualized. Divestedssof corporate investiture, he were God. Now, the particular motionssof the incarnated portions of the unparticled matter is thessthought of man; as the motion of the whole is that of God.ss_P._ You say that divested of the body man will be God?ss_V._ [_After much hesitation._] I could not have said this; it isssan absurdity.ss_P._ [_Referring to my notes._] You _did_ say that “divested ofsscorporate investiture man were God.”ss_V._ And this is true. Man thus divested _would be_ God—would bessunindividualized. But he can never be thus divested—at leastssnever _will be_—else we must imagine an action of God returningssupon itself—a purposeless and futile action. Man is a creature.ssCreatures are thoughts of God. It is the nature of thought to bessirrevocable.ss_P._ I do not comprehend. You say that man will never put off thessbody?ss_V._ I say that he will never be bodiless.ss_P._ Explain.ss_V._ There are two bodies—the rudimental and the complete;sscorresponding with the two conditions of the worm and thessbutterfly. What we call “death,” is but the painfulssmetamorphosis. Our present incarnation is progressive,sspreparatory, temporary. Our future is perfected, ultimate,ssimmortal. The ultimate life is the full design.ss_P._ But of the worm’s metamorphosis we are palpably cognizant.ss_V._ _We_, certainly—but not the worm. The matter of which ourssrudimental body is composed, is within the ken of the organs ofssthat body; or, more distinctly, our rudimental organs are adaptedssto the matter of which is formed the rudimental body; but not tossthat of which the ultimate is composed. The ultimate body thusssescapes our rudimental senses, and we perceive only the shellsswhich falls, in decaying, from the inner form; not that innerssform itself; but this inner form, as well as the shell, isssappreciable by those who have already acquired the ultimate life.ss_P._ You have often said that the mesmeric state very nearlyssresembles death. How is this?ss_V._ When I say that it resembles death, I mean that it resemblesssthe ultimate life; for when I am entranced the senses of myssrudimental life are in abeyance, and I perceive external thingsssdirectly, without organs, through a medium which I shall employssin the ultimate, unorganized life.ss_P._ Unorganized?ss_V._ Yes; organs are contrivances by which the individual isssbrought into sensible relation with particular classes and formsssof matter, to the exclusion of other classes and forms. Thessorgans of man are adapted to his rudimental condition, and tossthat only; his ultimate condition, being unorganized, is ofssunlimited comprehension in all points but one—the nature of thessvolition of God—that is to say, the motion of the unparticledssmatter. You will have a distinct idea of the ultimate body byssconceiving it to be entire brain. This it is _not_; but assconception of this nature will bring you near a comprehension ofsswhat it _is_. A luminous body imparts vibration to thessluminiferous ether. The vibrations generate similar ones withinssthe retina; these again communicate similar ones to the opticssnerve. The nerve conveys similar ones to the brain; the brain,ssalso, similar ones to the unparticled matter which permeates it.ssThe motion of this latter is thought, of which perception is thessfirst undulation. This is the mode by which the mind of thessrudimental life communicates with the external world; and thisssexternal world is, to the rudimental life, limited, through thessidiosyncrasy of its organs. But in the ultimate, unorganizedsslife, the external world reaches the whole body, (which is of asssubstance having affinity to brain, as I have said,) with nossother intervention than that of an infinitely rarer ether thansseven the luminiferous; and to this ether—in unison with it—thesswhole body vibrates, setting in motion the unparticled mattersswhich permeates it. It is to the absence of idiosyncratic organs,sstherefore, that we must attribute the nearly unlimited perceptionssof the ultimate life. To rudimental beings, organs are the cagesssnecessary to confine them until fledged.ss_P._ You speak of rudimental “beings.” Are there other rudimentalssthinking beings than man?ss_V._ The multitudinous conglomeration of rare matter into nebulæ,ssplanets, suns, and other bodies which are neither nebulæ, suns,ssnor planets, is for the sole purpose of supplying _pabulum_ forssthe idiosyncrasy of the organs of an infinity of rudimentalssbeings. But for the necessity of the rudimental, prior to thessultimate life, there would have been no bodies such as these.ssEach of these is tenanted by a distinct variety of organic,ssrudimental, thinking creatures. In all, the organs vary with thessfeatures of the place tenanted. At death, or metamorphosis, thesesscreatures, enjoying the ultimate life—immortality—and cognizantssof all secrets but _the one_, act all things and pass everywheressby mere volition:—indwelling, not the stars, which to us seem thesssole palpabilities, and for the accommodation of which we blindlyssdeem space created—but that SPACE itself—that infinity of whichssthe truly substantive vastness swallows up thessstar-shadows—blotting them out as non-entities from thessperception of the angels.ss_P._ You say that “but for the _necessity_ of the rudimentalsslife” there would have been no stars. But why this necessity?ss_V._ In the inorganic life, as well as in the inorganic matterssgenerally, there is nothing to impede the action of one simpless_unique_ law—the Divine Volition. With the view of producingssimpediment, the organic life and matter, (complex, substantial,ssand law-encumbered,) were contrived.ss_P._ But again—why need this impediment have been produced?ss_V._ The result of law inviolate is perfection—right—negativesshappiness. The result of law violate is imperfection, wrong,sspositive pain. Through the impediments afforded by the number,sscomplexity, and substantiality of the laws of organic life andssmatter, the violation of law is rendered, to a certain extent,sspracticable. Thus pain, which in the inorganic life isssimpossible, is possible in the organic.ss_P._ But to what good end is pain thus rendered possible?ss_V._ All things are either good or bad by comparison. Asssufficient analysis will show that pleasure, in all cases, is butssthe contrast of pain. _Positive_ pleasure is a mere idea. To besshappy at any one point we must have suffered at the same. Neverssto suffer would have been never to have been blessed. But it hasssbeen shown that, in the inorganic life, pain cannot be thus thessnecessity for the organic. The pain of the primitive life ofssEarth, is the sole basis of the bliss of the ultimate life inssHeaven.ss_P._ Still, there is one of your expressions which I find itssimpossible to comprehend—“the truly _substantive_ vastness ofssinfinity.”ss_V._ This, probably, is because you have no sufficiently genericssconception of the term “_substance_” itself. We must not regardssit as a quality, but as a sentiment:—it is the perception, inssthinking beings, of the adaptation of matter to theirssorganization. There are many things on the Earth, which would bessnihility to the inhabitants of Venus—many things visible andsstangible in Venus, which we could not be brought to appreciate asssexisting at all. But to the inorganic beings—to the angels—thesswhole of the unparticled matter is substance—that is to say, thesswhole of what we term “space” is to them the truestsssubstantiality;—the stars, meantime, through what we considersstheir materiality, escaping the angelic sense, just in proportionssas the unparticled matter, through what we consider itsssimmateriality, eludes the organic.ssAs the sleep-waker pronounced these latter words, in a feeblesstone, I observed on his countenance a singular expression, whichsssomewhat alarmed me, and induced me to awake him at once. Nosssooner had I done this, than, with a bright smile irradiating allsshis features, he fell back upon his pillow and expired. I noticedssthat in less than a minute afterward his corpse had all the sternssrigidity of stone. His brow was of the coldness of ice. Thus,ssordinarily, should it have appeared, only after long pressuressfrom Azrael’s hand. Had the sleep-waker, indeed, during thesslatter portion of his discourse, been addressing me from out thessregion of the shadows?ssTHE FACTS IN THE CASE OF M. VALDEMARssOf course I shall not pretend to consider it any matter forsswonder, that the extraordinary case of M. Valdemar has excitedssdiscussion. It would have been a miracle had it not—especiallyssunder the circumstances. Through the desire of all partiesssconcerned, to keep the affair from the public, at least for thesspresent, or until we had farther opportunities forssinvestigation—through our endeavors to effect this—a garbled orssexaggerated account made its way into society, and became thesssource of many unpleasant misrepresentations; and, veryssnaturally, of a great deal of disbelief.ssIt is now rendered necessary that I give the facts—as far as Isscomprehend them myself. They are, succinctly, these:ssMy attention, for the last three years, had been repeatedly drawnssto the subject of Mesmerism; and, about nine months ago itssoccurred to me, quite suddenly, that in the series of experimentsssmade hitherto, there had been a very remarkable and mostssunaccountable omission:—no person had as yet been mesmerized inssarticulo mortis. It remained to be seen, first, whether, in suchsscondition, there existed in the patient any susceptibility to thessmagnetic influence; secondly, whether, if any existed, it wasssimpaired or increased by the condition; thirdly, to what extent,ssor for how long a period, the encroachments of Death might bessarrested by the process. There were other points to bessascertained, but these most excited my curiosity—the last inssespecial, from the immensely important character of itsssconsequences.ssIn looking around me for some subject by whose means I might testssthese particulars, I was brought to think of my friend, M. ErnestssValdemar, the well-known compiler of the “Bibliotheca Forensica,”ssand author (under the nom de plume of Issachar Marx) of thessPolish versions of “Wallenstein” and “Gargantua.” M. Valdemar,sswho has resided principally at Harlem, N.Y., since the year 1839,ssis (or was) particularly noticeable for the extreme spareness ofsshis person—his lower limbs much resembling those of JohnssRandolph; and, also, for the whiteness of his whiskers, inssviolent contrast to the blackness of his hair—the latter, inssconsequence, being very generally mistaken for a wig. Hissstemperament was markedly nervous, and rendered him a good subjectssfor mesmeric experiment. On two or three occasions I had put himssto sleep with little difficulty, but was disappointed in otherssresults which his peculiar constitution had naturally led me tossanticipate. His will was at no period positively, or thoroughly,ssunder my control, and in regard to clairvoyance, I couldssaccomplish with him nothing to be relied upon. I alwaysssattributed my failure at these points to the disordered state ofsshis health. For some months previous to my becoming acquaintedsswith him, his physicians had declared him in a confirmedssphthisis. It was his custom, indeed, to speak calmly of hisssapproaching dissolution, as of a matter neither to be avoided norssregretted.ssWhen the ideas to which I have alluded first occurred to me, itsswas of course very natural that I should think of M. Valdemar. Issknew the steady philosophy of the man too well to apprehend anyssscruples from him; and he had no relatives in America who wouldssbe likely to interfere. I spoke to him frankly upon the subject;ssand, to my surprise, his interest seemed vividly excited. I sayssto my surprise, for, although he had always yielded his personssfreely to my experiments, he had never before given me any tokensssof sympathy with what I did. His disease was of that charactersswhich would admit of exact calculation in respect to the epoch ofssits termination in death; and it was finally arranged between usssthat he would send for me about twenty-four hours before thessperiod announced by his physicians as that of his decease.ssIt is now rather more than seven months since I received, from M.ssValdemar himself, the subjoined note:ssMY DEAR P——,ssYou may as well come now. D—— and F—— are agreed that I cannotsshold out beyond to-morrow midnight; and I think they have hit thesstime very nearly.ssVALDEMARssI received this note within half an hour after it was written,ssand in fifteen minutes more I was in the dying man’s chamber. Isshad not seen him for ten days, and was appalled by the fearfulssalteration which the brief interval had wrought in him. His facesswore a leaden hue; the eyes were utterly lustreless; and thessemaciation was so extreme that the skin had been broken throughssby the cheek-bones. His expectoration was excessive. The pulsesswas barely perceptible. He retained, nevertheless, in a veryssremarkable manner, both his mental power and a certain degree ofssphysical strength. He spoke with distinctness—took somesspalliative medicines without aid—and, when I entered the room,sswas occupied in penciling memoranda in a pocket-book. He wassspropped up in the bed by pillows. Doctors D—— and F—— were inssattendance.ssAfter pressing Valdemar’s hand, I took these gentlemen aside, andssobtained from them a minute account of the patient’s condition.ssThe left lung had been for eighteen months in a semi-osseous orsscartilaginous state, and was, of course, entirely useless for allsspurposes of vitality. The right, in its upper portion, was alsosspartially, if not thoroughly, ossified, while the lower regionsswas merely a mass of purulent tubercles, running one intossanother. Several extensive perforations existed; and, at onesspoint, permanent adhesion to the ribs had taken place. Thesessappearances in the right lobe were of comparatively recent date.ssThe ossification had proceeded with very unusual rapidity; nosssign of it had been discovered a month before, and the adhesionsshad only been observed during the three previous days.ssIndependently of the phthisis, the patient was suspected ofssaneurism of the aorta; but on this point the osseous symptomsssrendered an exact diagnosis impossible. It was the opinion ofssboth physicians that M. Valdemar would die about midnight on thessmorrow (Sunday). It was then seven o’clock on Saturday evening.ssOn quitting the invalid’s bed-side to hold conversation withssmyself, Doctors D—— and F—— had bidden him a final farewell. Itsshad not been their intention to return; but, at my request, theyssagreed to look in upon the patient about ten the next night.ssWhen they had gone, I spoke freely with M. Valdemar on thesssubject of his approaching dissolution, as well as, moressparticularly, of the experiment proposed. He still professedsshimself quite willing and even anxious to have it made, and urgedssme to commence it at once. A male and a female nurse were inssattendance; but I did not feel myself altogether at liberty tossengage in a task of this character with no more reliablesswitnesses than these people, in case of sudden accident, mightssprove. I therefore postponed operations until about eight thessnext night, when the arrival of a medical student with whom I hadsssome acquaintance, (Mr. Theodore L—l,) relieved me from fartherssembarrassment. It had been my design, originally, to wait for thessphysicians; but I was induced to proceed, first, by the urgentssentreaties of M. Valdemar, and secondly, by my conviction that Isshad not a moment to lose, as he was evidently sinking fast.ssMr. L—l was so kind as to accede to my desire that he would takessnotes of all that occurred, and it is from his memoranda thatsswhat I now have to relate is, for the most part, either condensedssor copied verbatim.ssIt wanted about five minutes of eight when, taking the patient’ssshand, I begged him to state, as distinctly as he could, to Mr.ssL—l, whether he (M. Valdemar) was entirely willing that I shouldssmake the experiment of mesmerizing him in his then condition.ssHe replied feebly, yet quite audibly, “Yes, I wish to be. I fearssyou have mesmerized”—adding immediately afterwards: “I fear yousshave deferred it too long.”ssWhile he spoke thus, I commenced the passes which I had alreadyssfound most effectual in subduing him. He was evidently influencedsswith the first lateral stroke of my hand across his forehead; butssalthough I exerted all my powers, no further perceptible effectsswas induced until some minutes after ten o’clock, when DoctorsssD—— and F—— called, according to appointment. I explained tossthem, in a few words, what I designed, and as they opposed nossobjection, saying that the patient was already in the deathssagony, I proceeded without hesitation—exchanging, however, thesslateral passes for downward ones, and directing my gaze entirelyssinto the right eye of the sufferer.ssBy this time his pulse was imperceptible and his breathing wasssstertorous, and at intervals of half a minute.ssThis condition was nearly unaltered for a quarter of an hour. Atssthe expiration of this period, however, a natural although a veryssdeep sigh escaped the bosom of the dying man, and the stertorousssbreathing ceased—that is to say, its stertorousness was no longerssapparent; the intervals were undiminished. The patient’sssextremities were of an icy coldness.ssAt five minutes before eleven I perceived unequivocal signs ofssthe mesmeric influence. The glassy roll of the eye was changedssfor that expression of uneasy inward examination which is neverssseen except in cases of sleep-waking, and which it is quitessimpossible to mistake. With a few rapid lateral passes I made thesslids quiver, as in incipient sleep, and with a few more I closedssthem altogether. I was not satisfied, however, with this, butsscontinued the manipulations vigorously, and with the fullestssexertion of the will, until I had completely stiffened the limbsssof the slumberer, after placing them in a seemingly easyssposition. The legs were at full length; the arms were nearly so,ssand reposed on the bed at a moderate distance from the loin. Thesshead was very slightly elevated.ssWhen I had accomplished this, it was fully midnight, and Issrequested the gentlemen present to examine M. Valdemar’ssscondition. After a few experiments, they admitted him to be anssunusually perfect state of mesmeric trance. The curiosity of bothssthe physicians was greatly excited. Dr. D—— resolved at once tossremain with the patient all night, while Dr. F—— took leave withssa promise to return at daybreak. Mr. L—l and the nurses remained.ssWe left M. Valdemar entirely undisturbed until about threesso’clock in the morning, when I approached him and found him inssprecisely the same condition as when Dr. F—— went away—that is tosssay, he lay in the same position; the pulse was imperceptible;ssthe breathing was gentle (scarcely noticeable, unless through thessapplication of a mirror to the lips); the eyes were closedssnaturally; and the limbs were as rigid and as cold as marble.ssStill, the general appearance was certainly not that of death.ssAs I approached M. Valdemar I made a kind of half effort tossinfluence his right arm into pursuit of my own, as I passed thesslatter gently to and fro above his person. In such experimentssswith this patient, I had never perfectly succeeded before, andssassuredly I had little thought of succeeding now; but to myssastonishment, his arm very readily, although feebly, followedssevery direction I assigned it with mine. I determined to hazard assfew words of conversation.ss“M. Valdemar,” I said, “are you asleep?” He made no answer, but Issperceived a tremor about the lips, and was thus induced to repeatssthe question, again and again. At its third repetition, his wholessframe was agitated by a very slight shivering; the eyelidsssunclosed themselves so far as to display a white line of thessball; the lips moved sluggishly, and from between them, in assbarely audible whisper, issued the words:ss“Yes;—asleep now. Do not wake me!—let me die so!”ssI here felt the limbs and found them as rigid as ever. The rightssarm, as before, obeyed the direction of my hand. I questioned thesssleep-waker again:ss“Do you still feel pain in the breast, M. Valdemar?”ssThe answer now was immediate, but even less audible than before:ss“No pain—I am dying.”ssI did not think it advisable to disturb him farther just then,ssand nothing more was said or done until the arrival of Dr. F——,sswho came a little before sunrise, and expressed unboundedssastonishment at finding the patient still alive. After feelingssthe pulse and applying a mirror to the lips, he requested me tossspeak to the sleep-waker again. I did so, saying:ss“M. Valdemar, do you still sleep?”ssAs before, some minutes elapsed ere a reply was made; and duringssthe interval the dying man seemed to be collecting his energiesssto speak. At my fourth repetition of the question, he said veryssfaintly, almost inaudibly:ss“Yes; still asleep—dying.”ssIt was now the opinion, or rather the wish, of the physicians,ssthat M. Valdemar should be suffered to remain undisturbed in hissspresent apparently tranquil condition, until death shouldsssupervene—and this, it was generally agreed, must now take placesswithin a few minutes. I concluded, however, to speak to him oncessmore, and merely repeated my previous question.ssWhile I spoke, there came a marked change over the countenance ofssthe sleep-waker. The eyes rolled themselves slowly open, thesspupils disappearing upwardly; the skin generally assumed asscadaverous hue, resembling not so much parchment as white paper;ssand the circular hectic spots which, hitherto, had been stronglyssdefined in the centre of each cheek, went out at once. I use thisssexpression, because the suddenness of their departure put me inssmind of nothing so much as the extinguishment of a candle by asspuff of the breath. The upper lip, at the same time, writhedssitself away from the teeth, which it had previously coveredsscompletely; while the lower jaw fell with an audible jerk,ssleaving the mouth widely extended, and disclosing in full viewssthe swollen and blackened tongue. I presume that no member of thessparty then present had been unaccustomed to death-bed horrors;ssbut so hideous beyond conception was the appearance of M.ssValdemar at this moment, that there was a general shrinking backssfrom the region of the bed.ssI now feel that I have reached a point of this narrative at whichssevery reader will be startled into positive disbelief. It is myssbusiness, however, simply to proceed.ssThere was no longer the faintest sign of vitality in M. Valdemar;ssand concluding him to be dead, we were consigning him to thesscharge of the nurses, when a strong vibratory motion wasssobservable in the tongue. This continued for perhaps a minute. Atssthe expiration of this period, there issued from the distendedssand motionless jaws a voice—such as it would be madness in me tossattempt describing. There are, indeed, two or three epithetssswhich might be considered as applicable to it in part; I mightsssay, for example, that the sound was harsh, and broken andsshollow; but the hideous whole is indescribable, for the simplessreason that no similar sounds have ever jarred upon the ear ofsshumanity. There were two particulars, nevertheless, which Issthought then, and still think, might fairly be stated assscharacteristic of the intonation—as well adapted to convey somessidea of its unearthly peculiarity. In the first place, the voicessseemed to reach our ears—at least mine—from a vast distance, orssfrom some deep cavern within the earth. In the second place, itssimpressed me (I fear, indeed, that it will be impossible to makessmyself comprehended) as gelatinous or glutinous matters impressssthe sense of touch.ssI have spoken both of “sound” and of “voice.” I mean to say thatssthe sound was one of distinct—of even wonderfully, thrillinglyssdistinct—syllabification. M. Valdemar spoke—obviously in reply tossthe question I had propounded to him a few minutes before. I hadssasked him, it will be remembered, if he still slept. He now said:ss“Yes;—no;—I have been sleeping—and now—now—I am dead.”ssNo person present even affected to deny, or attempted to repress,ssthe unutterable, shuddering horror which these few words, thusssuttered, were so well calculated to convey. Mr. L—l (the student)ssswooned. The nurses immediately left the chamber, and could notssbe induced to return. My own impressions I would not pretend tossrender intelligible to the reader. For nearly an hour, we busiedssourselves, silently—without the utterance of a word—in endeavorsssto revive Mr. L—l. When he came to himself, we addressedssourselves again to an investigation of M. Valdemar’s condition.ssIt remained in all respects as I have last described it, with thessexception that the mirror no longer afforded evidence ofssrespiration. An attempt to draw blood from the arm failed. Issshould mention, too, that this limb was no farther subject to mysswill. I endeavored in vain to make it follow the direction of mysshand. The only real indication, indeed, of the mesmericssinfluence, was now found in the vibratory movement of the tongue,sswhenever I addressed M. Valdemar a question. He seemed to bessmaking an effort to reply, but had no longer sufficient volition.ssTo queries put to him by any other person than myself he seemedssutterly insensible—although I endeavored to place each member ofssthe company in mesmeric rapport with him. I believe that I havessnow related all that is necessary to an understanding of thesssleep-waker’s state at this epoch. Other nurses were procured;ssand at ten o’clock I left the house in company with the twossphysicians and Mr. L—l.ssIn the afternoon we all called again to see the patient. Hissscondition remained precisely the same. We had now some discussionssas to the propriety and feasibility of awakening him; but we hadsslittle difficulty in agreeing that no good purpose would bessserved by so doing. It was evident that, so far, death (or whatssis usually termed death) had been arrested by the mesmericssprocess. It seemed clear to us all that to awaken M. Valdemarsswould be merely to insure his instant, or at least his speedy,ssdissolution.ssFrom this period until the close of last week—an interval ofssnearly seven months—we continued to make daily calls at M.ssValdemar’s house, accompanied, now and then, by medical and otherssfriends. All this time the sleeper-waker remained _exactly_ as Isshave last described him. The nurses’ attentions were continual.ssIt was on Friday last that we finally resolved to make thessexperiment of awakening, or attempting to awaken him; and it isssthe (perhaps) unfortunate result of this latter experiment whichsshas given rise to so much discussion in private circles—to sossmuch of what I cannot help thinking unwarranted popular feeling.ssFor the purpose of relieving M. Valdemar from the mesmericsstrance, I made use of the customary passes. These, for a time,sswere unsuccessful. The first indication of revival was affordedssby a partial descent of the iris. It was observed, as especiallyssremarkable, that this lowering of the pupil was accompanied byssthe profuse out-flowing of a yellowish ichor (from beneath thesslids) of a pungent and highly offensive odor.ssIt was now suggested that I should attempt to influence thesspatient’s arm, as heretofore. I made the attempt and failed. Dr.ssF—— then intimated a desire to have me put a question. I did so,ssas follows:ss“M. Valdemar, can you explain to us what are your feelings orsswishes now?”ssThere was an instant return of the hectic circles on the cheeks;ssthe tongue quivered, or rather rolled violently in the mouthss(although the jaws and lips remained rigid as before), and atsslength the same hideous voice which I have already described,ssbroke forth:ss“For God’s sake!—quick!—quick!—put me to sleep—or, quick!—wakenssme!—quick!—I say to you that I am dead!”ssI was thoroughly unnerved, and for an instant remained undecidedsswhat to do. At first I made an endeavor to recompose the patient;ssbut, failing in this through total abeyance of the will, Issretraced my steps and as earnestly struggled to awaken him. Inssthis attempt I soon saw that I should be successful—or at least Isssoon fancied that my success would be complete—and I am sure thatssall in the room were prepared to see the patient awaken.ssFor what really occurred, however, it is quite impossible thatssany human being could have been prepared.ssAs I rapidly made the mesmeric passes, amid ejaculations ofss“dead! dead!” absolutely bursting from the tongue and not fromssthe lips of the sufferer, his whole frame at once—within thessspace of a single minute, or even less,ssshrunk—crumbled—absolutely rotted away beneath my hands. Upon thessbed, before that whole company, there lay a nearly liquid mass ofssloathsome—of detestable putrescence.ssTHE BLACK CAT.ssFor the most wild, yet most homely narrative which I am about tosspen, I neither expect nor solicit belief. Mad indeed would I bessto expect it, in a case where my very senses reject their ownssevidence. Yet, mad am I not—and very surely do I not dream. Butssto-morrow I die, and to-day I would unburthen my soul. Myssimmediate purpose is to place before the world, plainly,sssuccinctly, and without comment, a series of mere householdssevents. In their consequences, these events have terrified—havesstortured—have destroyed me. Yet I will not attempt to expoundssthem. To me, they have presented little but horror—to many theysswill seem less terrible than _barroques_. Hereafter, perhaps,sssome intellect may be found which will reduce my phantasm to thesscommon-place—some intellect more calm, more logical, and far lessssexcitable than my own, which will perceive, in the circumstancesssI detail with awe, nothing more than an ordinary succession ofssvery natural causes and effects.ssFrom my infancy I was noted for the docility and humanity of myssdisposition. My tenderness of heart was even so conspicuous as tossmake me the jest of my companions. I was especially fond ofssanimals, and was indulged by my parents with a great variety ofsspets. With these I spent most of my time, and never was so happyssas when feeding and caressing them. This peculiarity of characterssgrew with my growth, and in my manhood, I derived from it one ofssmy principal sources of pleasure. To those who have cherished anssaffection for a faithful and sagacious dog, I need hardly be atssthe trouble of explaining the nature or the intensity of thessgratification thus derivable. There is something in the unselfishssand self-sacrificing love of a brute, which goes directly to thessheart of him who has had frequent occasion to test the paltryssfriendship and gossamer fidelity of mere _Man_.ssI married early, and was happy to find in my wife a dispositionssnot uncongenial with my own. Observing my partiality for domesticsspets, she lost no opportunity of procuring those of the mostssagreeable kind. We had birds, gold-fish, a fine dog, rabbits, asssmall monkey, and _a cat_.ssThis latter was a remarkably large and beautiful animal, entirelyssblack, and sagacious to an astonishing degree. In speaking of hisssintelligence, my wife, who at heart was not a little tincturedsswith superstition, made frequent allusion to the ancient popularssnotion, which regarded all black cats as witches in disguise. Notssthat she was ever _serious_ upon this point—and I mention thessmatter at all for no better reason than that it happens, justssnow, to be remembered.ssPluto—this was the cat’s name—was my favorite pet and playmate. Issalone fed him, and he attended me wherever I went about thesshouse. It was even with difficulty that I could prevent him fromssfollowing me through the streets.ssOur friendship lasted, in this manner, for several years, duringsswhich my general temperament and character—through thessinstrumentality of the Fiend Intemperance—had (I blush to confessssit) experienced a radical alteration for the worse. I grew, dayssby day, more moody, more irritable, more regardless of thessfeelings of others. I suffered myself to use intemperate languagessto my wife. At length, I even offered her personal violence. Mysspets, of course, were made to feel the change in my disposition.ssI not only neglected, but ill-used them. For Pluto, however, Issstill retained sufficient regard to restrain me from maltreatingsshim, as I made no scruple of maltreating the rabbits, the monkey,ssor even the dog, when by accident, or through affection, theysscame in my way. But my disease grew upon me—for what disease issslike Alcohol!—and at length even Pluto, who was now becoming old,ssand consequently somewhat peevish—even Pluto began to experiencessthe effects of my ill temper.ssOne night, returning home, much intoxicated, from one of mysshaunts about town, I fancied that the cat avoided my presence. Issseized him; when, in his fright at my violence, he inflicted assslight wound upon my hand with his teeth. The fury of a demonssinstantly possessed me. I knew myself no longer. My original soulssseemed, at once, to take its flight from my body and a more thanssfiendish malevolence, gin-nurtured, thrilled every fibre of myssframe. I took from my waistcoat-pocket a pen-knife, opened it,ssgrasped the poor beast by the throat, and deliberately cut one ofssits eyes from the socket! I blush, I burn, I shudder, while I penssthe damnable atrocity.ssWhen reason returned with the morning—when I had slept off thessfumes of the night’s debauch—I experienced a sentiment half ofsshorror, half of remorse, for the crime of which I had beenssguilty; but it was, at best, a feeble and equivocal feeling, andssthe soul remained untouched. I again plunged into excess, andsssoon drowned in wine all memory of the deed.ssIn the meantime the cat slowly recovered. The socket of the lostsseye presented, it is true, a frightful appearance, but he nosslonger appeared to suffer any pain. He went about the house asssusual, but, as might be expected, fled in extreme terror at myssapproach. I had so much of my old heart left, as to be at firstssgrieved by this evident dislike on the part of a creature whichsshad once so loved me. But this feeling soon gave place tossirritation. And then came, as if to my final and irrevocablessoverthrow, the spirit of PERVERSENESS. Of this spirit philosophysstakes no account. Yet I am not more sure that my soul lives, thanssI am that perverseness is one of the primitive impulses of thesshuman heart—one of the indivisible primary faculties, orsssentiments, which give direction to the character of Man. Who hasssnot, a hundred times, found himself committing a vile or a sillyssaction, for no other reason than because he knows he should not?ssHave we not a perpetual inclination, in the teeth of our bestssjudgment, to violate that which is _Law_, merely because wessunderstand it to be such? This spirit of perverseness, I say,sscame to my final overthrow. It was this unfathomable longing ofssthe soul _to vex itself_—to offer violence to its own nature—tossdo wrong for the wrong’s sake only—that urged me to continue andssfinally to consummate the injury I had inflicted upon thessunoffending brute. One morning, in cool blood, I slipped a noosessabout its neck and hung it to the limb of a tree;—hung it withssthe tears streaming from my eyes, and with the bitterest remorsessat my heart;—hung it _because_ I knew that it had loved me, andss_because_ I felt it had given me no reason of offence;—hung itss_because_ I knew that in so doing I was committing a sin—a deadlysssin that would so jeopardize my immortal soul as to place it—ifsssuch a thing wore possible—even beyond the reach of the infinitessmercy of the Most Merciful and Most Terrible God.ssOn the night of the day on which this cruel deed was done, I wasssaroused from sleep by the cry of fire. The curtains of my bedsswere in flames. The whole house was blazing. It was with greatssdifficulty that my wife, a servant, and myself, made our escapessfrom the conflagration. The destruction was complete. My entiressworldly wealth was swallowed up, and I resigned myselfssthenceforward to despair.ssI am above the weakness of seeking to establish a sequence ofsscause and effect, between the disaster and the atrocity. But I amssdetailing a chain of facts—and wish not to leave even a possiblesslink imperfect. On the day succeeding the fire, I visited thessruins. The walls, with one exception, had fallen in. Thisssexception was found in a compartment wall, not very thick, whichssstood about the middle of the house, and against which had restedssthe head of my bed. The plastering had here, in great measure,ssresisted the action of the fire—a fact which I attributed to itssshaving been recently spread. About this wall a dense crowd weresscollected, and many persons seemed to be examining a particularssportion of it with very minute and eager attention. The wordsss“strange!” “singular!” and other similar expressions, excited mysscuriosity. I approached and saw, as if graven in _bas relief_ssupon the white surface, the figure of a gigantic _cat_. Thessimpression was given with an accuracy truly marvellous. There wasssa rope about the animal’s neck.ssWhen I first beheld this apparition—for I could scarcely regardssit as less—my wonder and my terror were extreme. But at lengthssreflection came to my aid. The cat, I remembered, had been hungssin a garden adjacent to the house. Upon the alarm of fire, thisssgarden had been immediately filled by the crowd—by some one ofsswhom the animal must have been cut from the tree and thrown,ssthrough an open window, into my chamber. This had probably beenssdone with the view of arousing me from sleep. The falling ofssother walls had compressed the victim of my cruelty into thesssubstance of the freshly-spread plaster; the lime of which, withssthe flames, and the _ammonia_ from the carcass, had thenssaccomplished the portraiture as I saw it.ssAlthough I thus readily accounted to my reason, if not altogetherssto my conscience, for the startling fact just detailed, it didssnot the less fail to make a deep impression upon my fancy. Forssmonths I could not rid myself of the phantasm of the cat; and,ssduring this period, there came back into my spirit asshalf-sentiment that seemed, but was not, remorse. I went so farssas to regret the loss of the animal, and to look about me, amongssthe vile haunts which I now habitually frequented, for anothersspet of the same species, and of somewhat similar appearance, withsswhich to supply its place.ssOne night as I sat, half stupefied, in a den of more than infamy,ssmy attention was suddenly drawn to some black object, reposingssupon the head of one of the immense hogsheads of gin, or of rum,sswhich constituted the chief furniture of the apartment. I hadssbeen looking steadily at the top of this hogshead for somessminutes, and what now caused me surprise was the fact that I hadssnot sooner perceived the object thereupon. I approached it, andsstouched it with my hand. It was a black cat—a very largessone—fully as large as Pluto, and closely resembling him in everyssrespect but one. Pluto had not a white hair upon any portion ofsshis body; but this cat had a large, although indefinite splotchssof white, covering nearly the whole region of the breast. Upon mysstouching him, he immediately arose, purred loudly, rubbed againstssmy hand, and appeared delighted with my notice. This, then, wasssthe very creature of which I was in search. I at once offered tosspurchase it of the landlord; but this person made no claim tossit—knew nothing of it—had never seen it before.ssI continued my caresses, and, when I prepared to go home, thessanimal evinced a disposition to accompany me. I permitted it tossdo so; occasionally stooping and patting it as I proceeded. Whenssit reached the house it domesticated itself at once, and becamessimmediately a great favorite with my wife.ssFor my own part, I soon found a dislike to it arising within me.ssThis was just the reverse of what I had anticipated; but—I knowssnot how or why it was—its evident fondness for myself ratherssdisgusted and annoyed. By slow degrees, these feelings of disgustssand annoyance rose into the bitterness of hatred. I avoided thesscreature; a certain sense of shame, and the remembrance of myssformer deed of cruelty, preventing me from physically abusing it.ssI did not, for some weeks, strike, or otherwise violently ill usessit; but gradually—very gradually—I came to look upon it withssunutterable loathing, and to flee silently from its odioussspresence, as from the breath of a pestilence.ssWhat added, no doubt, to my hatred of the beast, was thessdiscovery, on the morning after I brought it home, that, likessPluto, it also had been deprived of one of its eyes. Thissscircumstance, however, only endeared it to my wife, who, as Isshave already said, possessed, in a high degree, that humanity ofssfeeling which had once been my distinguishing trait, and thesssource of many of my simplest and purest pleasures.ssWith my aversion to this cat, however, its partiality for myselfssseemed to increase. It followed my footsteps with a pertinacitysswhich it would be difficult to make the reader comprehend.ssWhenever I sat, it would crouch beneath my chair, or spring uponssmy knees, covering me with its loathsome caresses. If I arose tosswalk it would get between my feet and thus nearly throw me down,ssor, fastening its long and sharp claws in my dress, clamber, inssthis manner, to my breast. At such times, although I longed tossdestroy it with a blow, I was yet withheld from so doing, partlyssby a memory of my former crime, but chiefly—let me confess it atssonce—by absolute dread of the beast.ssThis dread was not exactly a dread of physical evil—and yet Issshould be at a loss how otherwise to define it. I am almostssashamed to own—yes, even in this felon’s cell, I am almostssashamed to own—that the terror and horror with which the animalssinspired me, had been heightened by one of the merest chimaerasssit would be possible to conceive. My wife had called myssattention, more than once, to the character of the mark of whitesshair, of which I have spoken, and which constituted the solessvisible difference between the strange beast and the one I hadssdestroyed. The reader will remember that this mark, althoughsslarge, had been originally very indefinite; but, by slowssdegrees—degrees nearly imperceptible, and which for a long timessmy reason struggled to reject as fanciful—it had, at length,ssassumed a rigorous distinctness of outline. It was now thessrepresentation of an object that I shudder to name—and for this,ssabove all, I loathed, and dreaded, and would have rid myself ofssthe monster _had I dared_—it was now, I say, the image of asshideous—of a ghastly thing—of the GALLOWS!—oh, mournful andssterrible engine of Horror and of Crime—of Agony and of Death!ssAnd now was I indeed wretched beyond the wretchedness of meressHumanity. And _a brute beast _—whose fellow I had contemptuouslyssdestroyed—_a brute beast_ to work out for _me_—for me a man,ssfashioned in the image of the High God—so much of insufferablesswoe! Alas! neither by day nor by night knew I the blessing ofssrest any more! During the former the creature left me no momentssalone, and in the latter I started hourly from dreams ofssunutterable fear to find the hot breath of _the thing_ upon myssface, and its vast weight—an incarnate nightmare that I had nosspower to shake off—incumbent eternally upon my _heart!_ssBeneath the pressure of torments such as these, the feeblessremnant of the good within me succumbed. Evil thoughts became mysssole intimates—the darkest and most evil of thoughts. Thessmoodiness of my usual temper increased to hatred of all thingsssand of all mankind; while, from the sudden, frequent, andssungovernable outbursts of a fury to which I now blindly abandonedssmyself, my uncomplaining wife, alas, was the most usual and thessmost patient of sufferers.ssOne day she accompanied me, upon some household errand, into thesscellar of the old building which our poverty compelled us tossinhabit. The cat followed me down the steep stairs, and, nearlyssthrowing me headlong, exasperated me to madness. Uplifting anssaxe, and forgetting, in my wrath, the childish dread which hadsshitherto stayed my hand, I aimed a blow at the animal which, ofsscourse, would have proved instantly fatal had it descended as Isswished. But this blow was arrested by the hand of my wife.ssGoaded, by the interference, into a rage more than demoniacal, Isswithdrew my arm from her grasp and buried the axe in her brain.ssShe fell dead upon the spot, without a groan.ssThis hideous murder accomplished, I set myself forthwith, andsswith entire deliberation, to the task of concealing the body. Issknew that I could not remove it from the house, either by day orssby night, without the risk of being observed by the neighbors.ssMany projects entered my mind. At one period I thought of cuttingssthe corpse into minute fragments, and destroying them by fire. Atssanother, I resolved to dig a grave for it in the floor of thesscellar. Again, I deliberated about casting it in the well in thessyard—about packing it in a box, as if merchandise, with the usualssarrangements, and so getting a porter to take it from the house.ssFinally I hit upon what I considered a far better expedient thansseither of these. I determined to wall it up in the cellar—as thessmonks of the middle ages are recorded to have walled up theirssvictims.ssFor a purpose such as this the cellar was well adapted. Its wallssswere loosely constructed, and had lately been plasteredssthroughout with a rough plaster, which the dampness of thessatmosphere had prevented from hardening. Moreover, in one of thesswalls was a projection, caused by a false chimney, or fireplace,ssthat had been filled up, and made to resemble the red of thesscellar. I made no doubt that I could readily displace the bricksssat this point, insert the corpse, and wall the whole up asssbefore, so that no eye could detect any thing suspicious. And inssthis calculation I was not deceived. By means of a crow-bar Isseasily dislodged the bricks, and, having carefully deposited thessbody against the inner wall, I propped it in that position,sswhile, with little trouble, I re-laid the whole structure as itssoriginally stood. Having procured mortar, sand, and hair, withssevery possible precaution, I prepared a plaster which could notssbe distinguished from the old, and with this I very carefullysswent over the new brickwork. When I had finished, I feltsssatisfied that all was right. The wall did not present thessslightest appearance of having been disturbed. The rubbish on thessfloor was picked up with the minutest care. I looked aroundsstriumphantly, and said to myself: “Here at least, then, my laborsshas not been in vain.”ssMy next step was to look for the beast which had been the causessof so much wretchedness; for I had, at length, firmly resolved tossput it to death. Had I been able to meet with it, at the moment,ssthere could have been no doubt of its fate; but it appeared thatssthe crafty animal had been alarmed at the violence of my previousssanger, and forebore to present itself in my present mood. It isssimpossible to describe, or to imagine, the deep, the blissfulsssense of relief which the absence of the detested creaturessoccasioned in my bosom. It did not make its appearance during thessnight; and thus for one night at least, since its introductionssinto the house, I soundly and tranquilly slept; aye, slept evensswith the burden of murder upon my soul!ssThe second and the third day passed, and still my tormentor camessnot. Once again I breathed as a freeman. The monster, in terror,sshad fled the premises forever! I should behold it no more! Mysshappiness was supreme! The guilt of my dark deed disturbed me butsslittle. Some few inquiries had been made, but these had beenssreadily answered. Even a search had been instituted—but of coursessnothing was to be discovered. I looked upon my future felicity assssecured.ssUpon the fourth day of the assassination, a party of the policesscame, very unexpectedly, into the house, and proceeded again tossmake rigorous investigation of the premises. Secure, however, inssthe inscrutability of my place of concealment, I felt nossembarrassment whatever. The officers bade me accompany them insstheir search. They left no nook or corner unexplored. At length,ssfor the third or fourth time, they descended into the cellar. Issquivered not in a muscle. My heart beat calmly as that of one whossslumbers in innocence. I walked the cellar from end to end. Issfolded my arms upon my bosom, and roamed easily to and fro. Thesspolice were thoroughly satisfied and prepared to depart. The gleessat my heart was too strong to be restrained. I burned to say ifssbut one word, by way of triumph, and to render doubly sure theirssassurance of my guiltlessness.ss“Gentlemen,” I said at last, as the party ascended the steps, “Issdelight to have allayed your suspicions. I wish you all health,ssand a little more courtesy. By the bye, gentlemen, this—this is assvery well-constructed house.” (In the rabid desire to saysssomething easily, I scarcely knew what I uttered at all.)—“I maysssay an _excellently_ well-constructed house. These walls—are youssgoing, gentlemen?—these walls are solidly put together;” andsshere, through the mere phrenzy of bravado, I rapped heavily, withssa cane which I held in my hand, upon that very portion of thessbrick-work behind which stood the corpse of the wife of my bosom.ssBut may God shield and deliver me from the fangs of thessArch-Fiend! No sooner had the reverberation of my blows sunk intosssilence, than I was answered by a voice from within the tomb!—byssa cry, at first muffled and broken, like the sobbing of a child,ssand then quickly swelling into one long, loud, and continuousssscream, utterly anomalous and inhuman—a howl—a wailing shriek,sshalf of horror and half of triumph, such as might have arisenssonly out of hell, conjointly from the throats of the damned insstheir agony and of the demons that exult in the damnation.ssOf my own thoughts it is folly to speak. Swooning, I staggered tossthe opposite wall. For one instant the party upon the stairsssremained motionless, through extremity of terror and of awe. Inssthe next, a dozen stout arms were toiling at the wall. It fellssbodily. The corpse, already greatly decayed and clotted withssgore, stood erect before the eyes of the spectators. Upon itssshead, with red extended mouth and solitary eye of fire, sat thesshideous beast whose craft had seduced me into murder, and whosessinforming voice had consigned me to the hangman. I had walled thessmonster up within the tomb!ssTHE FALL OF THE HOUSE OF USHERssSon cœur est un luth suspendu;ssSitôt qu’on le touche il résonne..

—_De Béranger_.ssDuring the whole of a dull, dark, and soundless day in the autumnssof the year, when the clouds hung oppressively low in thessheavens, I had been passing alone, on horseback, through asssingularly dreary tract of country; and at length found myself,ssas the shades of the evening drew on, within view of thessmelancholy House of Usher. I know not how it was—but, with thessfirst glimpse of the building, a sense of insufferable gloomsspervaded my spirit. I say insufferable; for the feeling wasssunrelieved by any of that half-pleasurable, because poetic,sssentiment, with which the mind usually receives even the sternestssnatural images of the desolate or terrible. I looked upon thessscene before me—upon the mere house, and the simple landscapessfeatures of the domain—upon the bleak walls—upon the vacantsseye-like windows—upon a few rank sedges—and upon a few whitesstrunks of decayed trees—with an utter depression of soul which Isscan compare to no earthly sensation more properly than to thessafter-dream of the reveller upon opium—the bitter lapse intosseveryday life—the hideous dropping off of the veil. There was anssiciness, a sinking, a sickening of the heart—an unredeemedssdreariness of thought which no goading of the imagination couldsstorture into aught of the sublime. What was it—I paused tossthink—what was it that so unnerved me in the contemplation of thessHouse of Usher? It was a mystery all insoluble; nor could Issgrapple with the shadowy fancies that crowded upon me as Isspondered. I was forced to fall back upon the unsatisfactoryssconclusion, that while, beyond doubt, there _are_ combinations ofssvery simple natural objects which have the power of thusssaffecting us, still the analysis of this power lies amongssconsiderations beyond our depth. It was possible, I reflected,ssthat a mere different arrangement of the particulars of thessscene, of the details of the picture, would be sufficient tossmodify, or perhaps to annihilate its capacity for sorrowfulssimpression; and, acting upon this idea, I reined my horse to thessprecipitous brink of a black and lurid tarn that lay in unruffledsslustre by the dwelling, and gazed down—but with a shudder evenssmore thrilling than before—upon the remodelled and invertedssimages of the gray sedge, and the ghastly tree-stems, and thessvacant and eye-like windows.ssNevertheless, in this mansion of gloom I now proposed to myself asssojourn of some weeks. Its proprietor, Roderick Usher, had beenssone of my boon companions in boyhood; but many years had elapsedsssince our last meeting. A letter, however, had lately reached messin a distant part of the country—a letter from him—which, in itssswildly importunate nature, had admitted of no other than asspersonal reply. The MS. gave evidence of nervous agitation. Thesswriter spoke of acute bodily illness—of a mental disorder whichssoppressed him—and of an earnest desire to see me, as his best,ssand indeed his only personal friend, with a view of attempting,ssby the cheerfulness of my society, some alleviation of hisssmalady. It was the manner in which all this, and much more, wassssaid—it was the apparent _heart_ that went with his request—whichssallowed me no room for hesitation; and I accordingly obeyedssforthwith what I still considered a very singular summons.ssAlthough, as boys, we had been even intimate associates, yet Issreally knew little of my friend. His reserve had been alwaysssexcessive and habitual. I was aware, however, that his veryssancient family had been noted, time out of mind, for a peculiarsssensibility of temperament, displaying itself, through long ages,ssin many works of exalted art, and manifested, of late, inssrepeated deeds of munificent yet unobtrusive charity, as well asssin a passionate devotion to the intricacies, perhaps even moressthan to the orthodox and easily recognisable beauties, of musicalssscience. I had learned, too, the very remarkable fact, that thessstem of the Usher race, all time-honored as it was, had putssforth, at no period, any enduring branch; in other words, thatssthe entire family lay in the direct line of descent, and hadssalways, with very trifling and very temporary variation, so lain.ssIt was this deficiency, I considered, while running over inssthought the perfect keeping of the character of the premises withssthe accredited character of the people, and while speculatingssupon the possible influence which the one, in the long lapse ofsscenturies, might have exercised upon the other—it was thisssdeficiency, perhaps, of collateral issue, and the consequentssundeviating transmission, from sire to son, of the patrimony withssthe name, which had, at length, so identified the two as to mergessthe original title of the estate in the quaint and equivocalssappellation of the “House of Usher”—an appellation which seemedssto include, in the minds of the peasantry who used it, both thessfamily and the family mansion.ssI have said that the sole effect of my somewhat childishssexperiment—that of looking down within the tarn—had been tossdeepen the first singular impression. There can be no doubt thatssthe consciousness of the rapid increase of my superstition—forsswhy should I not so term it?—served mainly to accelerate thessincrease itself. Such, I have long known, is the paradoxical lawssof all sentiments having terror as a basis. And it might havessbeen for this reason only, that, when I again uplifted my eyes tossthe house itself, from its image in the pool, there grew in myssmind a strange fancy—a fancy so ridiculous, indeed, that I butssmention it to show the vivid force of the sensations whichssoppressed me. I had so worked upon my imagination as really tossbelieve that about the whole mansion and domain there hung anssatmosphere peculiar to themselves and their immediate vicinity—anssatmosphere which had no affinity with the air of heaven, butsswhich had reeked up from the decayed trees, and the gray wall,ssand the silent tarn—a pestilent and mystic vapor, dull, sluggish,ssfaintly discernible, and leaden-hued.ssShaking off from my spirit what _must_ have been a dream, Issscanned more narrowly the real aspect of the building. Itsssprincipal feature seemed to be that of an excessive antiquity.ssThe discoloration of ages had been great. Minute fungi overspreadssthe whole exterior, hanging in a fine tangled web-work from thesseaves. Yet all this was apart from any extraordinaryssdilapidation. No portion of the masonry had fallen; and theressappeared to be a wild inconsistency between its still perfectssadaptation of parts, and the crumbling condition of thessindividual stones. In this there was much that reminded me of thessspecious totality of old wood-work which has rotted for longssyears in some neglected vault, with no disturbance from thessbreath of the external air. Beyond this indication of extensivessdecay, however, the fabric gave little token of instability.ssPerhaps the eye of a scrutinizing observer might have discoveredssa barely perceptible fissure, which, extending from the roof ofssthe building in front, made its way down the wall in a zigzagssdirection, until it became lost in the sullen waters of the tarn.ssNoticing these things, I rode over a short causeway to the house.ssA servant in waiting took my horse, and I entered the Gothicssarchway of the hall. A valet, of stealthy step, thence conductedssme, in silence, through many dark and intricate passages in myssprogress to the _studio_ of his master. Much that I encounteredsson the way contributed, I know not how, to heighten the vaguesssentiments of which I have already spoken. While the objectsssaround me—while the carvings of the ceilings, the sombresstapestries of the walls, the ebon blackness of the floors, andssthe phantasmagoric armorial trophies which rattled as I strode,sswere but matters to which, or to such as which, I had beenssaccustomed from my infancy—while I hesitated not to acknowledgesshow familiar was all this—I still wondered to find how unfamiliarsswere the fancies which ordinary images were stirring up. On onessof the staircases, I met the physician of the family. Hissscountenance, I thought, wore a mingled expression of low cunningssand perplexity. He accosted me with trepidation and passed on.ssThe valet now threw open a door and ushered me into the presencessof his master.ssThe room in which I found myself was very large and lofty. Thesswindows were long, narrow, and pointed, and at so vast a distancessfrom the black oaken floor as to be altogether inaccessible fromsswithin. Feeble gleams of encrimsoned light made their way throughssthe trellissed panes, and served to render sufficiently distinctssthe more prominent objects around; the eye, however, struggled inssvain to reach the remoter angles of the chamber, or the recessesssof the vaulted and fretted ceiling. Dark draperies hung upon thesswalls. The general furniture was profuse, comfortless, antique,ssand tattered. Many books and musical instruments lay scatteredssabout, but failed to give any vitality to the scene. I felt thatssI breathed an atmosphere of sorrow. An air of stern, deep, andssirredeemable gloom hung over and pervaded all.ssUpon my entrance, Usher arose from a sofa on which he had beensslying at full length, and greeted me with a vivacious warmthsswhich had much in it, I at first thought, of an overdonesscordiality—of the constrained effort of the _ennuyé_ man of thessworld. A glance, however, at his countenance, convinced me of hisssperfect sincerity. We sat down; and for some moments, while hessspoke not, I gazed upon him with a feeling half of pity, half ofssawe. Surely, man had never before so terribly altered, in sossbrief a period, as had Roderick Usher! It was with difficultyssthat I could bring myself to admit the identity of the wan beingssbefore me with the companion of my early boyhood. Yet thesscharacter of his face had been at all times remarkable. Asscadaverousness of complexion; an eye large, liquid, and luminousssbeyond comparison; lips somewhat thin and very pallid, but of asssurpassingly beautiful curve; a nose of a delicate Hebrew model,ssbut with a breadth of nostril unusual in similar formations; assfinely moulded chin, speaking, in its want of prominence, of asswant of moral energy; hair of a more than web-like softness andsstenuity; these features, with an inordinate expansion above thessregions of the temple, made up altogether a countenance notsseasily to be forgotten. And now in the mere exaggeration of thessprevailing character of these features, and of the expressionssthey were wont to convey, lay so much of change that I doubted tosswhom I spoke. The now ghastly pallor of the skin, and the nowssmiraculous lustre of the eye, above all things startled and evenssawed me. The silken hair, too, had been suffered to grow allssunheeded, and as, in its wild gossamer texture, it floated ratherssthan fell about the face, I could not, even with effort, connectssits Arabesque expression with any idea of simple humanity.ssIn the manner of my friend I was at once struck with anssincoherence—an inconsistency; and I soon found this to arise fromssa series of feeble and futile struggles to overcome an habitualsstrepidancy—an excessive nervous agitation. For something of thisssnature I had indeed been prepared, no less by his letter, than byssreminiscences of certain boyish traits, and by conclusionsssdeduced from his peculiar physical conformation and temperament.ssHis action was alternately vivacious and sullen. His voice variedssrapidly from a tremulous indecision (when the animal spiritsssseemed utterly in abeyance) to that species of energeticssconcision—that abrupt, weighty, unhurried, and hollow-soundingssenunciation—that leaden, self-balanced and perfectly modulatedssguttural utterance, which may be observed in the lost drunkard,ssor the irreclaimable eater of opium, during the periods of hisssmost intense excitement.ssIt was thus that he spoke of the object of my visit, of hisssearnest desire to see me, and of the solace he expected me tossafford him. He entered, at some length, into what he conceived tossbe the nature of his malady. It was, he said, a constitutionalssand a family evil, and one for which he despaired to find assremedy—a mere nervous affection, he immediately added, whichsswould undoubtedly soon pass off. It displayed itself in a host ofssunnatural sensations. Some of these, as he detailed them,ssinterested and bewildered me; although, perhaps, the terms, andssthe general manner of the narration had their weight. He sufferedssmuch from a morbid acuteness of the senses; the most insipid foodsswas alone endurable; he could wear only garments of certainsstexture; the odors of all flowers were oppressive; his eyes weresstortured by even a faint light; and there were but peculiarsssounds, and these from stringed instruments, which did notssinspire him with horror.ssTo an anomalous species of terror I found him a bounden slave. “Issshall perish,” said he, “I must perish in this deplorable folly.ssThus, thus, and not otherwise, shall I be lost. I dread thessevents of the future, not in themselves, but in their results. Issshudder at the thought of any, even the most trivial, incident,sswhich may operate upon this intolerable agitation of soul. Isshave, indeed, no abhorrence of danger, except in its absolutesseffect—in terror. In this unnerved—in this pitiable condition—Issfeel that the period will sooner or later arrive when I mustssabandon life and reason together, in some struggle with the grimssphantasm, FEAR.”ssI learned, moreover, at intervals, and through broken andssequivocal hints, another singular feature of his mentalsscondition. He was enchained by certain superstitious impressionsssin regard to the dwelling which he tenanted, and whence, for manyssyears, he had never ventured forth—in regard to an influencesswhose supposititious force was conveyed in terms too shadowy heressto be re-stated—an influence which some peculiarities in the meressform and substance of his family mansion, had, by dint of longsssufferance, he said, obtained over his spirit—an effect which thess_physique_ of the gray walls and turrets, and of the dim tarnssinto which they all looked down, had, at length, brought aboutssupon the _morale_ of his existence.ssHe admitted, however, although with hesitation, that much of thesspeculiar gloom which thus afflicted him could be traced to a moressnatural and far more palpable origin—to the severe andsslong-continued illness—indeed to the evidently approachingssdissolution—of a tenderly beloved sister—his sole companion forsslong years—his last and only relative on earth. “Her decease,” hesssaid, with a bitterness which I can never forget, “would leavesshim (him the hopeless and the frail) the last of the ancient racessof the Ushers.” While he spoke, the lady Madeline (for so was shesscalled) passed slowly through a remote portion of the apartment,ssand, without having noticed my presence, disappeared. I regardedssher with an utter astonishment not unmingled with dread—and yet Issfound it impossible to account for such feelings. A sensation ofssstupor oppressed me, as my eyes followed her retreating steps.ssWhen a door, at length, closed upon her, my glance soughtssinstinctively and eagerly the countenance of the brother—but hesshad buried his face in his hands, and I could only perceive thatssa far more than ordinary wanness had overspread the emaciatedssfingers through which trickled many passionate tears.ssThe disease of the lady Madeline had long baffled the skill ofssher physicians. A settled apathy, a gradual wasting away of thessperson, and frequent although transient affections of a partiallysscataleptical character, were the unusual diagnosis. Hitherto shesshad steadily borne up against the pressure of her malady, and hadssnot betaken herself finally to bed; but, on the closing in of thessevening of my arrival at the house, she succumbed (as her brothersstold me at night with inexpressible agitation) to the prostratingsspower of the destroyer; and I learned that the glimpse I hadssobtained of her person would thus probably be the last I shouldssobtain—that the lady, at least while living, would be seen by messno more.ssFor several days ensuing, her name was unmentioned by eitherssUsher or myself; and during this period I was busied in earnestssendeavors to alleviate the melancholy of my friend. We paintedssand read together; or I listened, as if in a dream, to the wildssimprovisations of his speaking guitar. And thus, as a closer andssstill closer intimacy admitted me more unreservedly into thessrecesses of his spirit, the more bitterly did I perceive thessfutility of all attempt at cheering a mind from which darkness,ssas if an inherent positive quality, poured forth upon all objectsssof the moral and physical universe, in one unceasing radiation ofssgloom.ssI shall ever bear about me a memory of the many solemn hours Issthus spent alone with the master of the House of Usher. Yet Issshould fail in any attempt to convey an idea of the exactsscharacter of the studies, or of the occupations, in which hessinvolved me, or led me the way. An excited and highly distemperedssideality threw a sulphureous lustre over all. His long improvisedssdirges will ring forever in my ears. Among other things, I holdsspainfully in mind a certain singular perversion and amplificationssof the wild air of the last waltz of Von Weber. From thesspaintings over which his elaborate fancy brooded, and which grew,sstouch by touch, into vaguenesses at which I shuddered the moressthrillingly, because I shuddered knowing not why—from thesesspaintings (vivid as their images now are before me) I would inssvain endeavor to educe more than a small portion which should liesswithin the compass of merely written words. By the uttersssimplicity, by the nakedness of his designs, he arrested andssoverawed attention. If ever mortal painted an idea, that mortalsswas Roderick Usher. For me at least—in the circumstances thensssurrounding me—there arose out of the pure abstractions which thesshypochondriac contrived to throw upon his canvass, an intensityssof intolerable awe, no shadow of which felt I ever yet in thesscontemplation of the certainly glowing yet too concrete reveriesssof Fuseli.ssOne of the phantasmagoric conceptions of my friend, partaking notssso rigidly of the spirit of abstraction, may be shadowed forth,ssalthough feebly, in words. A small picture presented the interiorssof an immensely long and rectangular vault or tunnel, with lowsswalls, smooth, white, and without interruption or device. Certainssaccessory points of the design served well to convey the ideassthat this excavation lay at an exceeding depth below the surfacessof the earth. No outlet was observed in any portion of its vastssextent, and no torch, or other artificial source of light wasssdiscernible; yet a flood of intense rays rolled throughout, andssbathed the whole in a ghastly and inappropriate splendor.ssI have just spoken of that morbid condition of the auditory nervesswhich rendered all music intolerable to the sufferer, with thessexception of certain effects of stringed instruments. It was,ssperhaps, the narrow limits to which he thus confined himself uponssthe guitar, which gave birth, in great measure, to the fantasticsscharacter of his performances. But the fervid _facility_ of hisss_impromptus_ could not be so accounted for. They must have been,ssand were, in the notes, as well as in the words of his wildssfantasias (for he not unfrequently accompanied himself withssrhymed verbal improvisations), the result of that intense mentalsscollectedness and concentration to which I have previouslyssalluded as observable only in particular moments of the highestssartificial excitement. The words of one of these rhapsodies Isshave easily remembered. I was, perhaps, the more forciblyssimpressed with it, as he gave it, because, in the under or mysticsscurrent of its meaning, I fancied that I perceived, and for thessfirst time, a full consciousness on the part of Usher of thesstottering of his lofty reason upon her throne. The verses, whichsswere entitled “The Haunted Palace,” ran very nearly, if notssaccurately, thus:ssI.ssIn the greenest of our valleys,ssBy good angels tenanted,ssOnce a fair and stately palace—ssRadiant palace—reared its head.ssIn the monarch Thought’s dominion—ssIt stood there!ssNever seraph spread a pinionssOver fabric half so fair.ssII.ssBanners yellow, glorious, golden,ssOn its roof did float and flow;ss(This—all this—was in the oldenssTime long ago)ssAnd every gentle air that dallied,ssIn that sweet day,ssAlong the ramparts plumed and pallid,ssA winged odor went away.ssIII.ssWanderers in that happy valleyssThrough two luminous windows sawssSpirits moving musicallyssTo a lute’s well-tunéd law,ssRound about a throne, where sittingss(Porphyrogene!)ssIn state his glory well befitting,ssThe ruler of the realm was seen.ssIV.ssAnd all with pearl and ruby glowingssWas the fair palace door,ssThrough which came flowing, flowing, flowing,ssAnd sparkling evermore,ssA troop of Echoes whose sweet dutyssWas but to sing,ssIn voices of surpassing beauty,ssThe wit and wisdom of their king.ssV.ssBut evil things, in robes of sorrow,ssAssailed the monarch’s high estate;ss(Ah, let us mourn, for never morrowssShall dawn upon him, desolate!)ssAnd, round about his home, the gloryssThat blushed and bloomedssIs but a dim-remembered storyssOf the old time entombed.ssVI.ssAnd travellers now within that valley,ssThrough the red-litten windows, seessVast forms that move fantasticallyssTo a discordant melody;ssWhile, like a rapid ghastly river,ssThrough the pale door,ssA hideous throng rush out forever,ssAnd laugh—but smile no more.ssI well remember that suggestions arising from this ballad, led usssinto a train of thought wherein there became manifest an opinionssof Usher’s which I mention not so much on account of its novelty,ss(for other men * have thought thus,) as on account of thesspertinacity with which he maintained it. This opinion, in itsssgeneral form, was that of the sentience of all vegetable things.ssBut, in his disordered fancy, the idea had assumed a more daringsscharacter, and trespassed, under certain conditions, upon thesskingdom of inorganization. I lack words to express the fullssextent, or the earnest _abandon_ of his persuasion. The belief,sshowever, was connected (as I have previously hinted) with thessgray stones of the home of his forefathers. The conditions of thesssentience had been here, he imagined, fulfilled in the method ofsscollocation of these stones—in the order of their arrangement, assswell as in that of the many _fungi_ which overspread them, and ofssthe decayed trees which stood around—above all, in the longssundisturbed endurance of this arrangement, and in itsssreduplication in the still waters of the tarn. Its evidence—thessevidence of the sentience—was to be seen, he said, (and I heressstarted as he spoke,) in the gradual yet certain condensation ofssan atmosphere of their own about the waters and the walls. Thessresult was discoverable, he added, in that silent, yetssimportunate and terrible influence which for centuries hadssmoulded the destinies of his family, and which made _him_ what Issnow saw him—what he was. Such opinions need no comment, and Isswill make none.ss* Watson, Dr. Percival, Spallanzani, and especially the Bishop ofssLandaff.—See “Chemical Essays,” vol v.ssOur books—the books which, for years, had formed no small portionssof the mental existence of the invalid—were, as might besssupposed, in strict keeping with this character of phantasm. Wesspored together over such works as the Ververt et Chartreuse ofssGresset; the Belphegor of Machiavelli; the Heaven and Hell ofssSwedenborg; the Subterranean Voyage of Nicholas Klimm by Holberg;ssthe Chiromancy of Robert Flud, of Jean D’Indaginé, and of De lassChambre; the Journey into the Blue Distance of Tieck; and thessCity of the Sun of Campanella. One favorite volume was a smallssoctavo edition of the _Directorium Inquisitorium_, by thessDominican Eymeric de Gironne; and there were passages inssPomponius Mela, about the old African Satyrs and OEgipans, oversswhich Usher would sit dreaming for hours. His chief delight,sshowever, was found in the perusal of an exceedingly rare andsscurious book in quarto Gothic—the manual of a forgottensschurch—the _Vigiliae Mortuorum secundum Chorum EcclesiaessMaguntinae_.ssI could not help thinking of the wild ritual of this work, and ofssits probable influence upon the hypochondriac, when, one evening,sshaving informed me abruptly that the lady Madeline was no more,sshe stated his intention of preserving her corpse for a fortnight,ss(previously to its final interment,) in one of the numerousssvaults within the main walls of the building. The worldly reason,sshowever, assigned for this singular proceeding, was one which Issdid not feel at liberty to dispute. The brother had been led tosshis resolution (so he told me) by consideration of the unusualsscharacter of the malady of the deceased, of certain obtrusive andsseager inquiries on the part of her medical men, and of the remotessand exposed situation of the burial-ground of the family. I willssnot deny that when I called to mind the sinister countenance ofssthe person whom I met upon the staircase, on the day of myssarrival at the house, I had no desire to oppose what I regardedssas at best but a harmless, and by no means an unnatural,ssprecaution.ssAt the request of Usher, I personally aided him in thessarrangements for the temporary entombment. The body having beenssencoffined, we two alone bore it to its rest. The vault in whichsswe placed it (and which had been so long unopened that oursstorches, half smothered in its oppressive atmosphere, gave ussslittle opportunity for investigation) was small, damp, andssentirely without means of admission for light; lying, at greatssdepth, immediately beneath that portion of the building in whichsswas my own sleeping apartment. It had been used, apparently, inssremote feudal times, for the worst purposes of a donjon-keep,ssand, in later days, as a place of deposit for powder, or somessother highly combustible substance, as a portion of its floor,ssand the whole interior of a long archway through which we reachedssit, were carefully sheathed with copper. The door, of massivessiron, had been, also, similarly protected. Its immense weightsscaused an unusually sharp grating sound, as it moved upon itssshinges.ssHaving deposited our mournful burden upon tressels within thisssregion of horror, we partially turned aside the yet unscrewed lidssof the coffin, and looked upon the face of the tenant. A strikingsssimilitude between the brother and sister now first arrested myssattention; and Usher, divining, perhaps, my thoughts, murmuredssout some few words from which I learned that the deceased andsshimself had been twins, and that sympathies of a scarcelyssintelligible nature had always existed between them. Our glances,sshowever, rested not long upon the dead—for we could not regardssher unawed. The disease which had thus entombed the lady in thessmaturity of youth, had left, as usual in all maladies of assstrictly cataleptical character, the mockery of a faint blushssupon the bosom and the face, and that suspiciously lingeringsssmile upon the lip which is so terrible in death. We replaced andssscrewed down the lid, and, having secured the door of iron, madessour way, with toil, into the scarcely less gloomy apartments ofssthe upper portion of the house.ssAnd now, some days of bitter grief having elapsed, an observablesschange came over the features of the mental disorder of myssfriend. His ordinary manner had vanished. His ordinaryssoccupations were neglected or forgotten. He roamed from chamberssto chamber with hurried, unequal, and objectless step. The pallorssof his countenance had assumed, if possible, a more ghastlysshue—but the luminousness of his eye had utterly gone out. Thessonce occasional huskiness of his tone was heard no more; and asstremulous quaver, as if of extreme terror, habituallysscharacterized his utterance. There were times, indeed, when Issthought his unceasingly agitated mind was laboring with somessoppressive secret, to divulge which he struggled for thessnecessary courage. At times, again, I was obliged to resolve allssinto the mere inexplicable vagaries of madness, for I beheld himssgazing upon vacancy for long hours, in an attitude of thessprofoundest attention, as if listening to some imaginary sound.ssIt was no wonder that his condition terrified—that it infectedssme. I felt creeping upon me, by slow yet certain degrees, thesswild influences of his own fantastic yet impressivesssuperstitions.ssIt was, especially, upon retiring to bed late in the night of thessseventh or eighth day after the placing of the lady Madelinesswithin the donjon, that I experienced the full power of suchssfeelings. Sleep came not near my couch—while the hours waned andsswaned away. I struggled to reason off the nervousness which hadssdominion over me. I endeavored to believe that much, if not allssof what I felt, was due to the bewildering influence of thessgloomy furniture of the room—of the dark and tattered draperies,sswhich, tortured into motion by the breath of a rising tempest,ssswayed fitfully to and fro upon the walls, and rustled uneasilyssabout the decorations of the bed. But my efforts were fruitless.ssAn irrepressible tremor gradually pervaded my frame; and, atsslength, there sat upon my very heart an incubus of utterlysscauseless alarm. Shaking this off with a gasp and a struggle, Issuplifted myself upon the pillows, and, peering earnestly withinssthe intense darkness of the chamber, harkened—I know not why,ssexcept that an instinctive spirit prompted me—to certain low andssindefinite sounds which came, through the pauses of the storm, atsslong intervals, I knew not whence. Overpowered by an intensesssentiment of horror, unaccountable yet unendurable, I threw on myssclothes with haste (for I felt that I should sleep no more duringssthe night), and endeavored to arouse myself from the pitiablesscondition into which I had fallen, by pacing rapidly to and frossthrough the apartment.ssI had taken but few turns in this manner, when a light step on anssadjoining staircase arrested my attention. I presently recognisedssit as that of Usher. In an instant afterward he rapped, with assgentle touch, at my door, and entered, bearing a lamp. Hissscountenance was, as usual, cadaverously wan—but, moreover, theresswas a species of mad hilarity in his eyes—an evidently restrainedss_hysteria_ in his whole demeanor. His air appalled me—butssanything was preferable to the solitude which I had so longssendured, and I even welcomed his presence as a relief.ss“And you have not seen it?” he said abruptly, after having staredssabout him for some moments in silence—“you have not then seenssit?—but, stay! you shall.” Thus speaking, and having carefullyssshaded his lamp, he hurried to one of the casements, and threw itssfreely open to the storm.ssThe impetuous fury of the entering gust nearly lifted us from ourssfeet. It was, indeed, a tempestuous yet sternly beautiful night,ssand one wildly singular in its terror and its beauty. A whirlwindsshad apparently collected its force in our vicinity; for theresswere frequent and violent alterations in the direction of thesswind; and the exceeding density of the clouds (which hung so lowssas to press upon the turrets of the house) did not prevent ourssperceiving the life-like velocity with which they flew careeringssfrom all points against each other, without passing away into thessdistance. I say that even their exceeding density did not preventssour perceiving this—yet we had no glimpse of the moon orssstars—nor was there any flashing forth of the lightning. But thessunder surfaces of the huge masses of agitated vapor, as well asssall terrestrial objects immediately around us, were glowing inssthe unnatural light of a faintly luminous and distinctly visiblessgaseous exhalation which hung about and enshrouded the mansion.ss“You must not—you shall not behold this!” said I, shudderingly,ssto Usher, as I led him, with a gentle violence, from the windowssto a seat. “These appearances, which bewilder you, are merelysselectrical phenomena not uncommon—or it may be that they havesstheir ghastly origin in the rank miasma of the tarn. Let us closessthis casement;—the air is chilling and dangerous to your frame.ssHere is one of your favorite romances. I will read, and you shallsslisten;—and so we will pass away this terrible night together.”ssThe antique volume which I had taken up was the “Mad Trist” ofssSir Launcelot Canning; but I had called it a favorite of Usher’sssmore in sad jest than in earnest; for, in truth, there is littlessin its uncouth and unimaginative prolixity which could have hadssinterest for the lofty and spiritual ideality of my friend. Itsswas, however, the only book immediately at hand; and I indulged assvague hope that the excitement which now agitated thesshypochondriac, might find relief (for the history of mentalssdisorder is full of similar anomalies) even in the extremeness ofssthe folly which I should read. Could I have judged, indeed, byssthe wild overstrained air of vivacity with which he harkened, orssapparently harkened, to the words of the tale, I might well havesscongratulated myself upon the success of my design.ssI had arrived at that well-known portion of the story wheressEthelred, the hero of the Trist, having sought in vain forsspeaceable admission into the dwelling of the hermit, proceeds tossmake good an entrance by force. Here, it will be remembered, thesswords of the narrative run thus:ss“And Ethelred, who was by nature of a doughty heart, and who wasssnow mighty withal, on account of the powerfulness of the winesswhich he had drunken, waited no longer to hold parley with thesshermit, who, in sooth, was of an obstinate and maliceful turn,ssbut, feeling the rain upon his shoulders, and fearing the risingssof the tempest, uplifted his mace outright, and, with blows, madessquickly room in the plankings of the door for his gauntletedsshand; and now pulling therewith sturdily, he so cracked, andssripped, and tore all asunder, that the noise of the dry andsshollow-sounding wood alarummed and reverberated throughout thessforest.”ssAt the termination of this sentence I started, and for a moment,sspaused; for it appeared to me (although I at once concluded thatssmy excited fancy had deceived me)—it appeared to me that, fromsssome very remote portion of the mansion, there came,ssindistinctly, to my ears, what might have been, in its exactsssimilarity of character, the echo (but a stifled and dull onesscertainly) of the very cracking and ripping sound which SirssLauncelot had so particularly described. It was, beyond doubt,ssthe coincidence alone which had arrested my attention; for, amidssthe rattling of the sashes of the casements, and the ordinarysscommingled noises of the still increasing storm, the sound, inssitself, had nothing, surely, which should have interested orssdisturbed me. I continued the story:ss“But the good champion Ethelred, now entering within the door,sswas sore enraged and amazed to perceive no signal of thessmaliceful hermit; but, in the stead thereof, a dragon of a scalyssand prodigious demeanor, and of a fiery tongue, which sate inssguard before a palace of gold, with a floor of silver; and uponssthe wall there hung a shield of shining brass with this legendssenwritten—ssWho entereth herein, a conqueror hath bin;ssWho slayeth the dragon, the shield he shall win;ssAnd Ethelred uplifted his mace, and struck upon the head of thessdragon, which fell before him, and gave up his pesty breath, withssa shriek so horrid and harsh, and withal so piercing, thatssEthelred had fain to close his ears with his hands against thessdreadful noise of it, the like whereof was never before heard.”ssHere again I paused abruptly, and now with a feeling of wildssamazement—for there could be no doubt whatever that, in thisssinstance, I did actually hear (although from what direction itssproceeded I found it impossible to say) a low and apparentlyssdistant, but harsh, protracted, and most unusual screaming orssgrating sound—the exact counterpart of what my fancy had alreadyssconjured up for the dragon’s unnatural shriek as described by thessromancer.ssOppressed, as I certainly was, upon the occurrence of this secondssand most extraordinary coincidence, by a thousand conflictingsssensations, in which wonder and extreme terror were predominant,ssI still retained sufficient presence of mind to avoid exciting,ssby any observation, the sensitive nervousness of my companion. Isswas by no means certain that he had noticed the sounds inssquestion; although, assuredly, a strange alteration had, duringssthe last few minutes, taken place in his demeanor. From assposition fronting my own, he had gradually brought round hissschair, so as to sit with his face to the door of the chamber; andssthus I could but partially perceive his features, although I sawssthat his lips trembled as if he were murmuring inaudibly. Hissshead had dropped upon his breast—yet I knew that he was notssasleep, from the wide and rigid opening of the eye as I caught assglance of it in profile. The motion of his body, too, was atssvariance with this idea—for he rocked from side to side with assgentle yet constant and uniform sway. Having rapidly taken noticessof all this, I resumed the narrative of Sir Launcelot, which thusssproceeded:ss“And now, the champion, having escaped from the terrible fury ofssthe dragon, bethinking himself of the brazen shield, and of thessbreaking up of the enchantment which was upon it, removed thesscarcass from out of the way before him, and approached valorouslyssover the silver pavement of the castle to where the shield wasssupon the wall; which in sooth tarried not for his full coming,ssbut fell down at his feet upon the silver floor, with a mightyssgreat and terrible ringing sound.”ssNo sooner had these syllables passed my lips, than—as if a shieldssof brass had indeed, at the moment, fallen heavily upon a floorssof silver—I became aware of a distinct, hollow, metallic, andssclangorous, yet apparently muffled reverberation. Completelyssunnerved, I leaped to my feet; but the measured rocking movementssof Usher was undisturbed. I rushed to the chair in which he sat.ssHis eyes were bent fixedly before him, and throughout his wholesscountenance there reigned a stony rigidity. But, as I placed mysshand upon his shoulder, there came a strong shudder over hissswhole person; a sickly smile quivered about his lips; and I sawssthat he spoke in a low, hurried, and gibbering murmur, as ifssunconscious of my presence. Bending closely over him, I at lengthssdrank in the hideous import of his words.ss“Not hear it?—yes, I hear it, and _have_ heard it.ssLong—long—long—many minutes, many hours, many days, have I heardssit—yet I dared not—oh, pity me, miserable wretch that I am!—Issdared not—I _dared_ not speak! _We have put her living in thesstomb!_ Said I not that my senses were acute? I _now_ tell youssthat I heard her first feeble movements in the hollow coffin. Issheard them—many, many days ago—yet I dared not—_I dared notssspeak!_ And now—to-night—Ethelred—ha! ha!—the breaking of thesshermit’s door, and the death-cry of the dragon, and the clangorssof the shield!—say, rather, the rending of her coffin, and thessgrating of the iron hinges of her prison, and her strugglessswithin the coppered archway of the vault! Oh whither shall I fly?ssWill she not be here anon? Is she not hurrying to upbraid me forssmy haste? Have I not heard her footstep on the stair? Do I notssdistinguish that heavy and horrible beating of her heart?ssMadman!”—here he sprang furiously to his feet, and shrieked outsshis syllables, as if in the effort he were giving up hissssoul—“_Madman! I tell you that she now stands without the door!_”ssAs if in the superhuman energy of his utterance there had beenssfound the potency of a spell—the huge antique pannels to whichssthe speaker pointed, threw slowly back, upon the instant, theirssponderous and ebony jaws. It was the work of the rushing gust—butssthen without those doors there _did_ stand the lofty andssenshrouded figure of the lady Madeline of Usher. There was bloodssupon her white robes, and the evidence of some bitter strugglessupon every portion of her emaciated frame. For a moment shessremained trembling and reeling to and fro upon thessthreshold—then, with a low moaning cry, fell heavily inward uponssthe person of her brother, and in her violent and now finalssdeath-agonies, bore him to the floor a corpse, and a victim tossthe terrors he had anticipated.ssFrom that chamber, and from that mansion, I fled aghast. Thessstorm was still abroad in all its wrath as I found myselfsscrossing the old causeway. Suddenly there shot along the path asswild light, and I turned to see whence a gleam so unusual couldsshave issued; for the vast house and its shadows were alone behindssme. The radiance was that of the full, setting, and blood-redssmoon, which now shone vividly through that oncessbarely-discernible fissure, of which I have before spoken asssextending from the roof of the building, in a zigzag direction,ssto the base. While I gazed, this fissure rapidly widened—theresscame a fierce breath of the whirlwind—the entire orb of thesssatellite burst at once upon my sight—my brain reeled as I sawssthe mighty walls rushing asunder—there was a long tumultuousssshouting sound like the voice of a thousand waters—and the deepssand dank tarn at my feet closed sullenly and silently over thessfragments of the “_House of Usher_.”ssSILENCE—A FABLEss“The mountain pinnacles slumber; valleys, crags and caves _aresssilent_.”ss“Listen to me,” said the Demon as he placed his hand upon mysshead. “The region of which I speak is a dreary region in Libya,ssby the borders of the river Zaire. And there is no quiet there,ssnor silence.ss“The waters of the river have a saffron and sickly hue; and theyssflow not onwards to the sea, but palpitate forever and foreverssbeneath the red eye of the sun with a tumultuous and convulsivessmotion. For many miles on either side of the river’s oozy bed isssa pale desert of gigantic water-lilies. They sigh one unto thessother in that solitude, and stretch towards the heaven their longssand ghastly necks, and nod to and fro their everlasting heads.ssAnd there is an indistinct murmur which cometh out from amongssthem like the rushing of subterrene water. And they sigh one untossthe other.ss“But there is a boundary to their realm—the boundary of the dark,sshorrible, lofty forest. There, like the waves about the Hebrides,ssthe low underwood is agitated continually. But there is no windssthroughout the heaven. And the tall primeval trees rock eternallysshither and thither with a crashing and mighty sound. And fromsstheir high summits, one by one, drop everlasting dews. And at thessroots strange poisonous flowers lie writhing in perturbedssslumber. And overhead, with a rustling and loud noise, the grayssclouds rush westwardly forever, until they roll, a cataract, overssthe fiery wall of the horizon. But there is no wind throughoutssthe heaven. And by the shores of the river Zaire there is neitherssquiet nor silence.ss“It was night, and the rain fell; and falling, it was rain, but,sshaving fallen, it was blood. And I stood in the morass among thesstall and the rain fell upon my head—and the lilies sighed onessunto the other in the solemnity of their desolation.ss“And, all at once, the moon arose through the thin ghastly mist,ssand was crimson in color. And mine eyes fell upon a huge grayssrock which stood by the shore of the river, and was lighted byssthe light of the moon. And the rock was gray, and ghastly, andsstall,—and the rock was gray. Upon its front were charactersssengraven in the stone; and I walked through the morass ofsswater-lilies, until I came close unto the shore, that I mightssread the characters upon the stone. But I could not decypherssthem. And I was going back into the morass, when the moon shonesswith a fuller red, and I turned and looked again upon the rock,ssand upon the characters, and the characters were DESOLATION.ss“And I looked upwards, and there stood a man upon the summit ofssthe rock; and I hid myself among the water-lilies that I mightssdiscover the actions of the man. And the man was tall and statelyssin form, and was wrapped up from his shoulders to his feet in thesstoga of old Rome. And the outlines of his figure weressindistinct—but his features were the features of a deity; for thessmantle of the night, and of the mist, and of the moon, and of thessdew, had left uncovered the features of his face. And his browsswas lofty with thought, and his eye wild with care; and, in thessfew furrows upon his cheek I read the fables of sorrow, andssweariness, and disgust with mankind, and a longing aftersssolitude.ss“And the man sat upon the rock, and leaned his head upon hissshand, and looked out upon the desolation. He looked down into thesslow unquiet shrubbery, and up into the tall primeval trees, andssup higher at the rustling heaven, and into the crimson moon. AndssI lay close within shelter of the lilies, and observed thessactions of the man. And the man trembled in the solitude;—but thessnight waned, and he sat upon the rock.ss“And the man turned his attention from the heaven, and looked outssupon the dreary river Zaire, and upon the yellow ghastly waters,ssand upon the pale legions of the water-lilies. And the mansslistened to the sighs of the water-lilies, and to the murmur thatsscame up from among them. And I lay close within my covert andssobserved the actions of the man. And the man trembled in thesssolitude;—but the night waned and he sat upon the rock.ss“Then I went down into the recesses of the morass, and waded afarssin among the wilderness of the lilies, and called unto thesshippopotami which dwelt among the fens in the recesses of thessmorass. And the hippopotami heard my call, and came, with thessbehemoth, unto the foot of the rock, and roared loudly andssfearfully beneath the moon. And I lay close within my covert andssobserved the actions of the man. And the man trembled in thesssolitude;—but the night waned and he sat upon the rock.ss“Then I cursed the elements with the curse of tumult; and assfrightful tempest gathered in the heaven where, before, there hadssbeen no wind. And the heaven became livid with the violence ofssthe tempest—and the rain beat upon the head of the man—and thessfloods of the river came down—and the river was tormented intossfoam—and the water-lilies shrieked within their beds—and thessforest crumbled before the wind—and the thunder rolled—and thesslightning fell—and the rock rocked to its foundation. And I layssclose within my covert and observed the actions of the man. Andssthe man trembled in the solitude;—but the night waned and he satssupon the rock.ss“Then I grew angry and cursed, with the curse of silence, thessriver, and the lilies, and the wind, and the forest, and thessheaven, and the thunder, and the sighs of the water-lilies. Andssthey became accursed, and were still. And the moon ceased tosstotter up its pathway to heaven—and the thunder died away—and thesslightning did not flash—and the clouds hung motionless—and thesswaters sunk to their level and remained—and the trees ceased tossrock—and the water-lilies sighed no more—and the murmur was heardssno longer from among them, nor any shadow of sound throughout thessvast illimitable desert. And I looked upon the characters of thessrock, and they were changed; and the characters were SILENCE.ss“And mine eyes fell upon the countenance of the man, and hissscountenance was wan with terror. And, hurriedly, he raised hissshead from his hand, and stood forth upon the rock and listened.ssBut there was no voice throughout the vast illimitable desert,ssand the characters upon the rock were SILENCE. And the manssshuddered, and turned his face away, and fled afar off, in haste,ssso that I beheld him no more.”ssNow there are fine tales in the volumes of the Magi—in thessiron-bound, melancholy volumes of the Magi. Therein, I say, aressglorious histories of the Heaven, and of the Earth, and of thessmighty sea—and of the Genii that over-ruled the sea, and thessearth, and the lofty heaven. There was much lore too in thesssayings which were said by the Sybils; and holy, holy things weressheard of old by the dim leaves that trembled around Dodona—but,ssas Allah liveth, that fable which the Demon told me as he sat byssmy side in the shadow of the tomb, I hold to be the mostsswonderful of all! And as the Demon made an end of his story, hessfell back within the cavity of the tomb and laughed. And I couldssnot laugh with the Demon, and he cursed me because I could notsslaugh. And the lynx which dwelleth forever in the tomb, came outsstherefrom, and lay down at the feet of the Demon, and looked atsshim steadily in the face.ssTHE MASQUE OF THE RED DEATH.ssThe “Red Death” had long devastated the country. No pestilencesshad ever been so fatal, or so hideous. Blood was its Avatar andssits seal—the redness and the horror of blood. There were sharpsspains, and sudden dizziness, and then profuse bleeding at thesspores, with dissolution. The scarlet stains upon the body andssespecially upon the face of the victim, were the pest ban whichssshut him out from the aid and from the sympathy of hisssfellow-men. And the whole seizure, progress and termination ofssthe disease, were the incidents of half an hour.ssBut the Prince Prospero was happy and dauntless and sagacious.ssWhen his dominions were half depopulated, he summoned to hissspresence a thousand hale and light-hearted friends from among thessknights and dames of his court, and with these retired to thessdeep seclusion of one of his castellated abbeys. This was anssextensive and magnificent structure, the creation of the prince’sssown eccentric yet august taste. A strong and lofty wall girdledssit in. This wall had gates of iron. The courtiers, havingssentered, brought furnaces and massy hammers and welded the bolts.ssThey resolved to leave means neither of ingress or egress to thesssudden impulses of despair or of frenzy from within. The abbeysswas amply provisioned. With such precautions the courtiers mightssbid defiance to contagion. The external world could take care ofssitself. In the meantime it was folly to grieve, or to think. Thessprince had provided all the appliances of pleasure. There weressbuffoons, there were improvisatori, there were ballet-dancers,ssthere were musicians, there was Beauty, there was wine. All thesessand security were within. Without was the “Red Death.”ssIt was toward the close of the fifth or sixth month of hisssseclusion, and while the pestilence raged most furiously abroad,ssthat the Prince Prospero entertained his thousand friends at assmasked ball of the most unusual magnificence.ssIt was a voluptuous scene, that masquerade. But first let me tellssof the rooms in which it was held. There were seven—an imperialsssuite. In many palaces, however, such suites form a long andssstraight vista, while the folding doors slide back nearly to thesswalls on either hand, so that the view of the whole extent isssscarcely impeded. Here the case was very different; as might havessbeen expected from the duke’s love of the bizarre. The apartmentssswere so irregularly disposed that the vision embraced but littlessmore than one at a time. There was a sharp turn at every twentyssor thirty yards, and at each turn a novel effect. To the rightssand left, in the middle of each wall, a tall and narrow Gothicsswindow looked out upon a closed corridor which pursued thesswindings of the suite. These windows were of stained glass whosesscolor varied in accordance with the prevailing hue of thessdecorations of the chamber into which it opened. That at thesseastern extremity was hung, for example, in blue—and vividly bluesswere its windows. The second chamber was purple in its ornamentsssand tapestries, and here the panes were purple. The third wasssgreen throughout, and so were the casements. The fourth wasssfurnished and lighted with orange—the fifth with white—the sixthsswith violet. The seventh apartment was closely shrouded in blackssvelvet tapestries that hung all over the ceiling and down thesswalls, falling in heavy folds upon a carpet of the same materialssand hue. But in this chamber only, the color of the windowsssfailed to correspond with the decorations. The panes here weressscarlet—a deep blood color. Now in no one of the seven apartmentssswas there any lamp or candelabrum, amid the profusion of goldenssornaments that lay scattered to and fro or depended from thessroof. There was no light of any kind emanating from lamp orsscandle within the suite of chambers. But in the corridors thatssfollowed the suite, there stood, opposite to each window, a heavysstripod, bearing a brazier of fire that projected its rays throughssthe tinted glass and so glaringly illumined the room. And thussswere produced a multitude of gaudy and fantastic appearances. Butssin the western or black chamber the effect of the fire-light thatssstreamed upon the dark hangings through the blood-tinted panes,sswas ghastly in the extreme, and produced so wild a look upon thesscountenances of those who entered, that there were few of thesscompany bold enough to set foot within its precincts at all.ssIt was in this apartment, also, that there stood against thesswestern wall, a gigantic clock of ebony. Its pendulum swung tossand fro with a dull, heavy, monotonous clang; and when thessminute-hand made the circuit of the face, and the hour was to bessstricken, there came from the brazen lungs of the clock a soundsswhich was clear and loud and deep and exceedingly musical, but ofssso peculiar a note and emphasis that, at each lapse of an hour,ssthe musicians of the orchestra were constrained to pause,ssmomentarily, in their performance, to hearken to the sound; andssthus the waltzers perforce ceased their evolutions; and there wasssa brief disconcert of the whole gay company; and, while thesschimes of the clock yet rang, it was observed that the giddiestssgrew pale, and the more aged and sedate passed their hands oversstheir brows as if in confused reverie or meditation. But when thessechoes had fully ceased, a light laughter at once pervaded thessassembly; the musicians looked at each other and smiled as if atsstheir own nervousness and folly, and made whispering vows, eachssto the other, that the next chiming of the clock should producessin them no similar emotion; and then, after the lapse of sixtyssminutes (which embrace three thousand and six hundred seconds ofssthe Time that flies), there came yet another chiming of thessclock, and then were the same disconcert and tremulousness andssmeditation as before.ssBut, in spite of these things, it was a gay and magnificentssrevel. The tastes of the duke were peculiar. He had a fine eyessfor colors and effects. He disregarded the decora of meressfashion. His plans were bold and fiery, and his conceptionsssglowed with barbaric lustre. There are some who would havessthought him mad. His followers felt that he was not. It wasssnecessary to hear and see and touch him to be sure that he wasssnot.ssHe had directed, in great part, the moveable embellishments ofssthe seven chambers, upon occasion of this great fête; and it wassshis own guiding taste which had given character to thessmasqueraders. Be sure they were grotesque. There were much glaressand glitter and piquancy and phantasm—much of what has been sincessseen in “Hernani.” There were arabesque figures with unsuitedsslimbs and appointments. There were delirious fancies such as thessmadman fashions. There was much of the beautiful, much of thesswanton, much of the bizarre, something of the terrible, and not asslittle of that which might have excited disgust. To and fro inssthe seven chambers there stalked, in fact, a multitude of dreams.ssAnd these—the dreams—writhed in and about, taking hue from thessrooms, and causing the wild music of the orchestra to seem as thessecho of their steps. And, anon, there strikes the ebony clocksswhich stands in the hall of the velvet. And then, for a moment,ssall is still, and all is silent save the voice of the clock. Thessdreams are stiff-frozen as they stand. But the echoes of thesschime die away—they have endured but an instant—and a light,sshalf-subdued laughter floats after them as they depart. And nowssagain the music swells, and the dreams live, and writhe to andssfro more merrily than ever, taking hue from the many-tintedsswindows through which stream the rays from the tripods. But tossthe chamber which lies most westwardly of the seven, there aressnow none of the maskers who venture; for the night is waningssaway; and there flows a ruddier light through the blood-coloredsspanes; and the blackness of the sable drapery appals; and to himsswhose foot falls upon the sable carpet, there comes from the nearssclock of ebony a muffled peal more solemnly emphatic than anysswhich reaches their ears who indulge in the more remote gaietiesssof the other apartments.ssBut these other apartments were densely crowded, and in them beatssfeverishly the heart of life. And the revel went whirlingly on,ssuntil at length there commenced the sounding of midnight upon thessclock. And then the music ceased, as I have told; and thessevolutions of the waltzers were quieted; and there was an uneasysscessation of all things as before. But now there were twelvessstrokes to be sounded by the bell of the clock; and thus itsshappened, perhaps, that more of thought crept, with more of time,ssinto the meditations of the thoughtful among those who revelled.ssAnd thus, too, it happened, perhaps, that before the last echoesssof the last chime had utterly sunk into silence, there were manyssindividuals in the crowd who had found leisure to become aware ofssthe presence of a masked figure which had arrested the attentionssof no single individual before. And the rumor of this newsspresence having spread itself whisperingly around, there arose atsslength from the whole company a buzz, or murmur, expressive ofssdisapprobation and surprise—then, finally, of terror, of horror,ssand of disgust.ssIn an assembly of phantasms such as I have painted, it may wellssbe supposed that no ordinary appearance could have excited suchsssensation. In truth the masquerade license of the night wasssnearly unlimited; but the figure in question had out-HerodedssHerod, and gone beyond the bounds of even the prince’s indefinitessdecorum. There are chords in the hearts of the most recklesssswhich cannot be touched without emotion. Even with the utterlysslost, to whom life and death are equally jests, there are mattersssof which no jest can be made. The whole company, indeed, seemedssnow deeply to feel that in the costume and bearing of thessstranger neither wit nor propriety existed. The figure was tallssand gaunt, and shrouded from head to foot in the habiliments ofssthe grave. The mask which concealed the visage was made so nearlyssto resemble the countenance of a stiffened corpse that thessclosest scrutiny must have had difficulty in detecting the cheat.ssAnd yet all this might have been endured, if not approved, by thessmad revellers around. But the mummer had gone so far as to assumessthe type of the Red Death. His vesture was dabbled in blood—andsshis broad brow, with all the features of the face, wasssbesprinkled with the scarlet horror.ssWhen the eyes of Prince Prospero fell upon this spectral imagess(which with a slow and solemn movement, as if more fully tosssustain its role, stalked to and fro among the waltzers) he wasssseen to be convulsed, in the first moment with a strong shuddersseither of terror or distaste; but, in the next, his brow reddenedsswith rage.ss“Who dares?” he demanded hoarsely of the courtiers who stood nearsshim—“who dares insult us with this blasphemous mockery? Seize himssand unmask him—that we may know whom we have to hang at sunrise,ssfrom the battlements!”ssIt was in the eastern or blue chamber in which stood the PrincessProspero as he uttered these words. They rang throughout thessseven rooms loudly and clearly—for the prince was a bold andssrobust man, and the music had become hushed at the waving of hissshand.ssIt was in the blue room where stood the prince, with a group ofsspale courtiers by his side. At first, as he spoke, there was assslight rushing movement of this group in the direction of thessintruder, who at the moment was also near at hand, and now, withssdeliberate and stately step, made closer approach to the speaker.ssBut from a certain nameless awe with which the mad assumptions ofssthe mummer had inspired the whole party, there were found nonesswho put forth hand to seize him; so that, unimpeded, he passedsswithin a yard of the prince’s person; and, while the vastssassembly, as if with one impulse, shrank from the centres of thessrooms to the walls, he made his way uninterruptedly, but with thesssame solemn and measured step which had distinguished him fromssthe first, through the blue chamber to the purple—through thesspurple to the green—through the green to the orange—through thisssagain to the white—and even thence to the violet, ere a decidedssmovement had been made to arrest him. It was then, however, thatssthe Prince Prospero, maddening with rage and the shame of his ownssmomentary cowardice, rushed hurriedly through the six chambers,sswhile none followed him on account of a deadly terror that hadssseized upon all. He bore aloft a drawn dagger, and hadssapproached, in rapid impetuosity, to within three or four feet ofssthe retreating figure, when the latter, having attained thessextremity of the velvet apartment, turned suddenly and confrontedsshis pursuer. There was a sharp cry—and the dagger droppedssgleaming upon the sable carpet, upon which, instantly afterwards,ssfell prostrate in death the Prince Prospero. Then, summoning thesswild courage of despair, a throng of the revellers at once threwssthemselves into the black apartment, and, seizing the mummer,sswhose tall figure stood erect and motionless within the shadow ofssthe ebony clock, gasped in unutterable horror at finding thessgrave-cerements and corpse-like mask which they handled with sossviolent a rudeness, untenanted by any tangible form.ssAnd now was acknowledged the presence of the Red Death. He hadsscome like a thief in the night. And one by one dropped thessrevellers in the blood-bedewed halls of their revel, and diedsseach in the despairing posture of his fall. And the life of thessebony clock went out with that of the last of the gay. And thessflames of the tripods expired. And Darkness and Decay and the RedssDeath held illimitable dominion over all.ssTHE CASK OF AMONTILLADO.ssThe thousand injuries of Fortunato I had borne as I best could;ssbut when he ventured upon insult, I vowed revenge. You, who sosswell know the nature of my soul, will not suppose, however, thatssI gave utterance to a threat. _At length_ I would be avenged;ssthis was a point definitively settled—but the very definitivenesssswith which it was resolved, precluded the idea of risk. I mustssnot only punish, but punish with impunity. A wrong is unredressedsswhen retribution overtakes its redresser. It is equallyssunredressed when the avenger fails to make himself felt as suchssto him who has done the wrong.ssIt must be understood, that neither by word nor deed had I givenssFortunato cause to doubt my good will. I continued, as was mysswont, to smile in his face, and he did not perceive that my smiless_now_ was at the thought of his immolation.ssHe had a weak point—this Fortunato—although in other regards hesswas a man to be respected and even feared. He prided himself onsshis connoisseurship in wine. Few Italians have the true virtuosossspirit. For the most part their enthusiasm is adopted to suit thesstime and opportunity—to practise imposture upon the British andssAustrian _millionaires_. In painting and gemmary, Fortunato, likesshis countrymen, was a quack—but in the matter of old wines he wassssincere. In this respect I did not differ from him materially: Isswas skilful in the Italian vintages myself, and bought largelysswhenever I could.ssIt was about dusk, one evening during the supreme madness of thesscarnival season, that I encountered my friend. He accosted messwith excessive warmth, for he had been drinking much. The mansswore motley. He had on a tight-fitting parti-striped dress, andsshis head was surmounted by the conical cap and bells. I was sosspleased to see him, that I thought I should never have donesswringing his hand.ssI said to him: “My dear Fortunato, you are luckily met. Howssremarkably well you are looking to-day! But I have received asspipe of what passes for Amontillado, and I have my doubts.”ss“How?” said he. “Amontillado? A pipe? Impossible! And in thessmiddle of the carnival!”ss“I have my doubts,” I replied; “and I was silly enough to pay thessfull Amontillado price without consulting you in the matter. Yousswere not to be found, and I was fearful of losing a bargain.”ss“Amontillado!”ss“I have my doubts.”ss“Amontillado!”ss“And I must satisfy them.”ss“Amontillado!”ss“As you are engaged, I am on my way to Luchesi. If any one has asscritical turn, it is he. He will tell me—”ss“Luchesi cannot tell Amontillado from Sherry.”ss“And yet some fools will have it that his taste is a match forssyour own.”ss“Come, let us go.”ss“Whither?”ss“To your vaults.”ss“My friend, no; I will not impose upon your good nature. Issperceive you have an engagement. Luchesi—”ss“I have no engagement;—come.”ss“My friend, no. It is not the engagement, but the severe coldsswith which I perceive you are afflicted. The vaults aressinsufferably damp. They are encrusted with nitre.”ss“Let us go, nevertheless. The cold is merely nothing.ssAmontillado! You have been imposed upon. And as for Luchesi, hesscannot distinguish Sherry from Amontillado.”ssThus speaking, Fortunato possessed himself of my arm. Putting onssa mask of black silk, and drawing a _roquelaire_ closely about myssperson, I suffered him to hurry me to my palazzo.ssThere were no attendants at home; they had absconded to makessmerry in honor of the time. I had told them that I should notssreturn until the morning, and had given them explicit orders notssto stir from the house. These orders were sufficient, I wellssknew, to insure their immediate disappearance, one and all, assssoon as my back was turned.ssI took from their sconces two flambeaux, and giving one tossFortunato, bowed him through several suites of rooms to thessarchway that led into the vaults. I passed down a long andsswinding staircase, requesting him to be cautious as he followed.ssWe came at length to the foot of the descent, and stood togethersson the damp ground of the catacombs of the Montresors.ssThe gait of my friend was unsteady, and the bells upon his capssjingled as he strode.ss“The pipe,” said he.ss“It is farther on,” said I; “but observe the white web-work whichssgleams from these cavern walls.”ssHe turned towards me, and looked into my eyes with two filmy orbsssthat distilled the rheum of intoxication.ss“Nitre?” he asked, at length.ss“Nitre,” I replied. “How long have you had that cough?”ss“Ugh! ugh! ugh!—ugh! ugh! ugh!—ugh! ugh! ugh!—ugh! ugh! ugh!—ugh!ssugh! ugh!”ssMy poor friend found it impossible to reply for many minutes.ss“It is nothing,” he said, at last.ss“Come,” I said, with decision, “we will go back; your health isssprecious. You are rich, respected, admired, beloved; you aresshappy, as once I was. You are a man to be missed. For me it is nossmatter. We will go back; you will be ill, and I cannot bessresponsible. Besides, there is Luchesi—”ss“Enough,” he said; “the cough is a mere nothing; it will not killssme. I shall not die of a cough.”ss“True—true,” I replied; “and, indeed, I had no intention ofssalarming you unnecessarily—but you should use all proper caution.ssA draught of this Medoc will defend us from the damps.”ssHere I knocked off the neck of a bottle which I drew from a longssrow of its fellows that lay upon the mould.ss“Drink,” I said, presenting him the wine.ssHe raised it to his lips with a leer. He paused and nodded to messfamiliarly, while his bells jingled.ss“I drink,” he said, “to the buried that repose around us.”ss“And I to your long life.”ssHe again took my arm, and we proceeded.ss“These vaults,” he said, “are extensive.”ss“The Montresors,” I replied, “were a great and numerous family.”ss“I forget your arms.”ss“A huge human foot d’or, in a field azure; the foot crushes assserpent rampant whose fangs are imbedded in the heel.”ss“And the motto?”ss“_Nemo me impune lacessit_.”ss“Good!” he said.ssThe wine sparkled in his eyes and the bells jingled. My own fancyssgrew warm with the Medoc. We had passed through walls of piledssbones, with casks and puncheons intermingling, into the inmostssrecesses of the catacombs. I paused again, and this time I madessbold to seize Fortunato by an arm above the elbow.ss“The nitre!” I said: “see, it increases. It hangs like moss uponssthe vaults. We are below the river’s bed. The drops of moisturesstrickle among the bones. Come, we will go back ere it is toosslate. Your cough—”ss“It is nothing,” he said; “let us go on. But first, anotherssdraught of the Medoc.”ssI broke and reached him a flagon of De Grâve. He emptied it at assbreath. His eyes flashed with a fierce light. He laughed andssthrew the bottle upwards with a gesticulation I did notssunderstand.ssI looked at him in surprise. He repeated the movement—a grotesquessone.ss“You do not comprehend?” he said.ss“Not I,” I replied.ss“Then you are not of the brotherhood.”ss“How?”ss“You are not of the masons.”ss“Yes, yes,” I said, “yes, yes.”ss“You? Impossible! A mason?”ss“A mason,” I replied.ss“A sign,” he said.ss“It is this,” I answered, producing a trowel from beneath thessfolds of my _roquelaire_.ss“You jest,” he exclaimed, recoiling a few paces. “But let usssproceed to the Amontillado.”ss“Be it so,” I said, replacing the tool beneath the cloak, andssagain offering him my arm. He leaned upon it heavily. Wesscontinued our route in search of the Amontillado. We passedssthrough a range of low arches, descended, passed on, andssdescending again, arrived at a deep crypt, in which the foulnessssof the air caused our flambeaux rather to glow than flame.ssAt the most remote end of the crypt there appeared another lessssspacious. Its walls had been lined with human remains, piled tossthe vault overhead, in the fashion of the great catacombs ofssParis. Three sides of this interior crypt were still ornamentedssin this manner. From the fourth the bones had been thrown down,ssand lay promiscuously upon the earth, forming at one point assmound of some size. Within the wall thus exposed by thessdisplacing of the bones, we perceived a still interior recess, inssdepth about four feet, in width three, in height six or seven. Itssseemed to have been constructed for no especial use in itself,ssbut formed merely the interval between two of the colossalsssupports of the roof of the catacombs, and was backed by one ofsstheir circumscribing walls of solid granite.ssIt was in vain that Fortunato, uplifting his dull torch,ssendeavored to pry into the depths of the recess. Its terminationssthe feeble light did not enable us to see.ss“Proceed,” I said; “herein is the Amontillado. As for Luchesi—”ss“He is an ignoramus,” interrupted my friend, as he steppedssunsteadily forward, while I followed immediately at his heels. Inssan instant he had reached the extremity of the niche, and findingsshis progress arrested by the rock, stood stupidly bewildered. Assmoment more and I had fettered him to the granite. In its surfacesswere two iron staples, distant from each other about two feet,sshorizontally. From one of these depended a short chain, from thessother a padlock. Throwing the links about his waist, it was butssthe work of a few seconds to secure it. He was too much astoundedssto resist. Withdrawing the key I stepped back from the recess.ss“Pass your hand,” I said, “over the wall; you cannot help feelingssthe nitre. Indeed it is _very_ damp. Once more let me _implore_ssyou to return. No? Then I must positively leave you. But I mustssfirst render you all the little attentions in my power.”ss“The Amontillado!” ejaculated my friend, not yet recovered fromsshis astonishment.ss“True,” I replied; “the Amontillado.”ssAs I said these words I busied myself among the pile of bones ofsswhich I have before spoken. Throwing them aside, I soon uncoveredssa quantity of building stone and mortar. With these materials andsswith the aid of my trowel, I began vigorously to wall up thessentrance of the niche.ssI had scarcely laid the first tier of my masonry when Issdiscovered that the intoxication of Fortunato had in a greatssmeasure worn off. The earliest indication I had of this was a lowssmoaning cry from the depth of the recess. It was _not_ the cry ofssa drunken man. There was then a long and obstinate silence. Isslaid the second tier, and the third, and the fourth; and then Issheard the furious vibrations of the chain. The noise lasted forssseveral minutes, during which, that I might hearken to it withssthe more satisfaction, I ceased my labors and sat down upon thessbones. When at last the clanking subsided, I resumed the trowel,ssand finished without interruption the fifth, the sixth, and thessseventh tier. The wall was now nearly upon a level with myssbreast. I again paused, and holding the flambeaux over thessmason-work, threw a few feeble rays upon the figure within.ssA succession of loud and shrill screams, bursting suddenly fromssthe throat of the chained form, seemed to thrust me violentlyssback. For a brief moment I hesitated—I trembled. Unsheathing myssrapier, I began to grope with it about the recess; but thessthought of an instant reassured me. I placed my hand upon thesssolid fabric of the catacombs, and felt satisfied. I reapproachedssthe wall. I replied to the yells of him who clamored. Issre-echoed—I aided—I surpassed them in volume and in strength. Issdid this, and the clamorer grew still.ssIt was now midnight, and my task was drawing to a close. I hadsscompleted the eighth, the ninth, and the tenth tier. I hadssfinished a portion of the last and the eleventh; there remainedssbut a single stone to be fitted and plastered in. I struggledsswith its weight; I placed it partially in its destined position.ssBut now there came from out the niche a low laugh that erectedssthe hairs upon my head. It was succeeded by a sad voice, which Isshad difficulty in recognising as that of the noble Fortunato. Thessvoice said—ss“Ha! ha! ha!—he! he!—a very good joke indeed—an excellent jest.ssWe will have many a rich laugh about it at the palazzo—he! he!sshe!—over our wine—he! he! he!”ss“The Amontillado!” I said.ss“He! he! he!—he! he! he!—yes, the Amontillado. But is it notssgetting late? Will not they be awaiting us at the palazzo, thessLady Fortunato and the rest? Let us be gone.”ss“Yes,” I said, “let us be gone.”ss“_For the love of God, Montressor!_”ss“Yes,” I said, “for the love of God!”ssBut to these words I hearkened in vain for a reply. I grewssimpatient. I called aloud—ss“Fortunato!”ssNo answer. I called again—ss“Fortunato!”ssNo answer still. I thrust a torch through the remaining aperturessand let it fall within. There came forth in return only assjingling of the bells. My heart grew sick—on account of thessdampness of the catacombs. I hastened to make an end of my labor.ssI forced the last stone into its position; I plastered it up.ssAgainst the new masonry I re-erected the old rampart of bones.ssFor the half of a century no mortal has disturbed them. _In pacessrequiescat!_ssTHE IMP OF THE PERVERSEssIn the consideration of the faculties and impulses—of the primassmobilia of the human soul, the phrenologists have failed to makessroom for a propensity which, although obviously existing as assradical, primitive, irreducible sentiment, has been equallyssoverlooked by all the moralists who have preceded them. In thesspure arrogance of the reason, we have all overlooked it. We havesssuffered its existence to escape our senses, solely through wantssof belief—of faith;—whether it be faith in Revelation, or faithssin the Kabbala. The idea of it has never occurred to us, simplyssbecause of its supererogation. We saw no need of the impulse—forssthe propensity. We could not perceive its necessity. We could notssunderstand, that is to say, we could not have understood, had thessnotion of this primum mobile ever obtruded itself;—we could notsshave understood in what manner it might be made to further thessobjects of humanity, either temporal or eternal. It cannot bessdenied that phrenology and, in great measure, allssmetaphysicianism have been concocted a priori. The intellectualssor logical man, rather than the understanding or observant man,ssset himself to imagine designs—to dictate purposes to God. Havingssthus fathomed, to his satisfaction, the intentions of Jehovah,ssout of these intentions he built his innumerable systems of mind.ssIn the matter of phrenology, for example, we first determined,ssnaturally enough, that it was the design of the Deity that manssshould eat. We then assigned to man an organ of alimentiveness,ssand this organ is the scourge with which the Deity compels man,sswill-I nill-I, into eating. Secondly, having settled it to bessGod’s will that man should continue his species, we discovered anssorgan of amativeness, forthwith. And so with combativeness, withssideality, with causality, with constructiveness,—so, in short,sswith every organ, whether representing a propensity, a moralsssentiment, or a faculty of the pure intellect. And in thesessarrangements of the Principia of human action, the Spurzheimites,sswhether right or wrong, in part, or upon the whole, have butssfollowed, in principle, the footsteps of their predecessors;ssdeducing and establishing every thing from the preconceivedssdestiny of man, and upon the ground of the objects of hisssCreator.ssIt would have been wiser, it would have been safer, to classifyss(if classify we must) upon the basis of what man usually orssoccasionally did, and was always occasionally doing, rather thanssupon the basis of what we took it for granted the Deity intendedsshim to do. If we cannot comprehend God in his visible works, howssthen in his inconceivable thoughts, that call the works intossbeing? If we cannot understand him in his objective creatures,sshow then in his substantive moods and phases of creation?ssInduction, _a posteriori_, would have brought phrenology tossadmit, as an innate and primitive principle of human action, assparadoxical something, which we may call _perverseness_, for wantssof a more characteristic term. In the sense I intend, it is, inssfact, a _mobile_ without motive, a motive not _motivirt_. Throughssits promptings we act without comprehensible object; or, if thisssshall be understood as a contradiction in terms, we may so farssmodify the proposition as to say, that through its promptings wessact, for the reason that we should _not_. In theory, no reasonsscan be more unreasonable, but, in fact, there is none moressstrong. With certain minds, under certain conditions, it becomesssabsolutely irresistible. I am not more certain that I breathe,ssthan that the assurance of the wrong or error of any action isssoften the one unconquerable _force_ which impels us, and alonessimpels us to its prosecution. Nor will this overwhelming tendencyssto do wrong for the wrong’s sake, admit of analysis, orssresolution into ulterior elements. It is a radical, a primitivessimpulse—elementary. It will be said, I am aware, that when wesspersist in acts because we feel we should not persist in them,ssour conduct is but a modification of that which ordinarilysssprings from the combativeness of phrenology. But a glance willssshow the fallacy of this idea. The phrenological combativenesssshas for its essence, the necessity of self-defence. It is oursssafeguard against injury. Its principle regards our well-being;ssand thus the desire to be well is excited simultaneously with itsssdevelopment. It follows, that the desire to be well must bessexcited simultaneously with any principle which shall be merely assmodification of combativeness, but in the case of that somethingsswhich I term perverseness, the desire to be well is not only notssaroused, but a strongly antagonistical sentiment exists.ssAn appeal to one’s own heart is, after all, the best reply to thesssophistry just noticed. No one who trustingly consults andssthoroughly questions his own soul, will be disposed to deny thessentire radicalness of the propensity in question. It is not moressincomprehensible than distinctive. There lives no man who at somessperiod has not been tormented, for example, by an earnest desiressto tantalize a listener by circumlocution. The speaker is awaressthat he displeases; he has every intention to please, he isssusually curt, precise, and clear; the most laconic and luminoussslanguage is struggling for utterance upon his tongue; it is onlysswith difficulty that he restrains himself from giving it flow; hessdreads and deprecates the anger of him whom he addresses; yet,ssthe thought strikes him, that by certain involutions andssparentheses this anger may be engendered. That single thought isssenough. The impulse increases to a wish, the wish to a desire,ssthe desire to an uncontrollable longing, and the longing (to thessdeep regret and mortification of the speaker, and in defiance ofssall consequences) is indulged.ssWe have a task before us which must be speedily performed. Wessknow that it will be ruinous to make delay. The most importantsscrisis of our life calls, trumpet-tongued, for immediate energyssand action. We glow, we are consumed with eagerness to commencessthe work, with the anticipation of whose glorious result oursswhole souls are on fire. It must, it shall be undertaken to-day,ssand yet we put it off until to-morrow; and why? There is nossanswer, except that we feel perverse, using the word with nosscomprehension of the principle. To-morrow arrives, and with it assmore impatient anxiety to do our duty, but with this veryssincrease of anxiety arrives, also, a nameless, a positivelyssfearful, because unfathomable, craving for delay. This cravingssgathers strength as the moments fly. The last hour for action isssat hand. We tremble with the violence of the conflict withinssus,—of the definite with the indefinite—of the substance with thessshadow. But, if the contest have proceeded thus far, it is thessshadow which prevails,—we struggle in vain. The clock strikes,ssand is the knell of our welfare. At the same time, it is thesschanticleer-note to the ghost that has so long overawed us. Itssflies—it disappears—we are free. The old energy returns. We willsslabor now. Alas, it is too late!ssWe stand upon the brink of a precipice. We peer into the abyss—wessgrow sick and dizzy. Our first impulse is to shrink from thessdanger. Unaccountably we remain. By slow degrees our sickness andssdizziness and horror become merged in a cloud of unnamablessfeeling. By gradations, still more imperceptible, this cloudssassumes shape, as did the vapor from the bottle out of whichssarose the genius in the Arabian Nights. But out of this our cloudssupon the precipice’s edge, there grows into palpability, a shape,ssfar more terrible than any genius or any demon of a tale, and yetssit is but a thought, although a fearful one, and one which chillsssthe very marrow of our bones with the fierceness of the delightssof its horror. It is merely the idea of what would be oursssensations during the sweeping precipitancy of a fall from such assheight. And this fall—this rushing annihilation—for the veryssreason that it involves that one most ghastly and loathsome ofssall the most ghastly and loathsome images of death and sufferingsswhich have ever presented themselves to our imagination—for thisssvery cause do we now the most vividly desire it. And because ourssreason violently deters us from the brink, therefore do we thessmost impetuously approach it. There is no passion in nature sossdemoniacally impatient, as that of him who, shuddering upon thessedge of a precipice, thus meditates a plunge. To indulge, for assmoment, in any attempt at thought, is to be inevitably lost; forssreflection but urges us to forbear, and therefore it is, I say,ssthat we cannot. If there be no friendly arm to check us, or if wessfail in a sudden effort to prostrate ourselves backward from thessabyss, we plunge, and are destroyed.ssExamine these similar actions as we will, we shall find themssresulting solely from the spirit of the Perverse. We perpetratessthem because we feel that we should not. Beyond or behind thisssthere is no intelligible principle; and we might, indeed, deemssthis perverseness a direct instigation of the Arch-Fiend, were itssnot occasionally known to operate in furtherance of good.ssI have said thus much, that in some measure I may answer yourssquestion—that I may explain to you why I am here—that I mayssassign to you something that shall have at least the faint aspectssof a cause for my wearing these fetters, and for my tenantingssthis cell of the condemned. Had I not been thus prolix, you mightsseither have misunderstood me altogether, or, with the rabble,sshave fancied me mad. As it is, you will easily perceive that I amssone of the many uncounted victims of the Imp of the Perverse.ssIt is impossible that any deed could have been wrought with assmore thorough deliberation. For weeks, for months, I ponderedssupon the means of the murder. I rejected a thousand schemes,ssbecause their accomplishment involved a _chance_ of detection. Atsslength, in reading some French memoirs, I found an account of assnearly fatal illness that occurred to Madame Pilau, through thessagency of a candle accidentally poisoned. The idea struck myssfancy at once. I knew my victim’s habit of reading in bed. Issknew, too, that his apartment was narrow and ill-ventilated. ButssI need not vex you with impertinent details. I need not describessthe easy artifices by which I substituted, in his bed-roomsscandle-stand, a wax-light of my own making for the one which Issthere found. The next morning he was discovered dead in his bed,ssand the coroner’s verdict was—“Death by the visitation of God.”ssHaving inherited his estate, all went well with me for years. Thessidea of detection never once entered my brain. Of the remains ofssthe fatal taper I had myself carefully disposed. I had left nossshadow of a clew by which it would be possible to convict, orsseven to suspect me of the crime. It is inconceivable how rich asssentiment of satisfaction arose in my bosom as I reflected uponssmy absolute security. For a very long period of time I wasssaccustomed to revel in this sentiment. It afforded me more realssdelight than all the mere worldly advantages accruing from mysssin. But there arrived at length an epoch, from which thesspleasurable feeling grew, by scarcely perceptible gradations,ssinto a haunting and harassing thought. It harassed because itsshaunted. I could scarcely get rid of it for an instant. It isssquite a common thing to be thus annoyed with the ringing in ourssears, or rather in our memories, of the burthen of some ordinarysssong, or some unimpressive snatches from an opera. Nor will we bessthe less tormented if the song in itself be good, or the operassair meritorious. In this manner, at last, I would perpetuallysscatch myself pondering upon my security, and repeating, in a lowssundertone, the phrase, “I am safe.”ssOne day, whilst sauntering along the streets, I arrested myselfssin the act of murmuring, half aloud, these customary syllables.ssIn a fit of petulance, I remodelled them thus: “I am safe—I amsssafe—yes—if I be not fool enough to make open confession!”ssNo sooner had I spoken these words, than I felt an icy chillsscreep to my heart. I had had some experience in these fits ofssperversity (whose nature I have been at some trouble to explain),ssand I remembered well that in no instance I had successfullyssresisted their attacks. And now my own casual self-suggestionssthat I might possibly be fool enough to confess the murder ofsswhich I had been guilty, confronted me, as if the very ghost ofsshim whom I had murdered—and beckoned me on to death.ssAt first, I made an effort to shake off this nightmare of thesssoul. I walked vigorously—faster—still faster—at length I ran. Issfelt a maddening desire to shriek aloud. Every succeeding wave ofssthought overwhelmed me with new terror, for, alas! I well, toosswell understood that to think, in my situation, was to be lost. Issstill quickened my pace. I bounded like a madman through thesscrowded thoroughfares. At length, the populace took the alarm,ssand pursued me. I felt then the consummation of my fate. Could Isshave torn out my tongue, I would have done it, but a rough voicessresounded in my ears—a rougher grasp seized me by the shoulder. Issturned—I gasped for breath. For a moment I experienced all thesspangs of suffocation; I became blind, and deaf, and giddy; andssthen some invisible fiend, I thought, struck me with his broadsspalm upon the back. The long imprisoned secret burst forth fromssmy soul.ssThey say that I spoke with a distinct enunciation, but withssmarked emphasis and passionate hurry, as if in dread ofssinterruption before concluding the brief but pregnant sentencesssthat consigned me to the hangman and to hell.ssHaving related all that was necessary for the fullest judicialssconviction, I fell prostrate in a swoon.ssBut why shall I say more? To-day I wear these chains, and amss_here!_ To-morrow I shall be fetterless!—_but where?_ssTHE ISLAND OF THE FAYssNullus enim locus sine genio est.—_Servius_.ss“La musique,” says Marmontel, in those “Contes Moraux” (*1) whichssin all our translations, we have insisted upon calling “MoralssTales,” as if in mockery of their spirit—“la musique est le seulssdes talents qui jouissent de lui-même; tous les autres veulentssdes temoins.” He here confounds the pleasure derivable from sweetsssounds with the capacity for creating them. No more than anyssother talent, is that for music susceptible of completessenjoyment, where there is no second party to appreciate itsssexercise. And it is only in common with other talents that itssproduces effects which may be fully enjoyed in solitude. The ideasswhich the raconteur has either failed to entertain clearly, orsshas sacrificed in its expression to his national love of point,ssis, doubtless, the very tenable one that the higher order ofssmusic is the most thoroughly estimated when we are exclusivelyssalone. The proposition, in this form, will be admitted at once byssthose who love the lyre for its own sake, and for its spiritualssuses. But there is one pleasure still within the reach of fallenssmortality and perhaps only one—which owes even more than doesssmusic to the accessory sentiment of seclusion. I mean thesshappiness experienced in the contemplation of natural scenery. Insstruth, the man who would behold aright the glory of God uponssearth must in solitude behold that glory. To me, at least, thesspresence—not of human life only, but of life in any other formssthan that of the green things which grow upon the soil and aressvoiceless—is a stain upon the landscape—is at war with the geniusssof the scene. I love, indeed, to regard the dark valleys, and thessgray rocks, and the waters that silently smile, and the forestsssthat sigh in uneasy slumbers, and the proud watchful mountainsssthat look down upon all,—I love to regard these as themselves butssthe colossal members of one vast animate and sentient whole—asswhole whose form (that of the sphere) is the most perfect andssmost inclusive of all; whose path is among associate planets;sswhose meek handmaiden is the moon, whose mediate sovereign is thesssun; whose life is eternity, whose thought is that of a God;sswhose enjoyment is knowledge; whose destinies are lost inssimmensity, whose cognizance of ourselves is akin with our ownsscognizance of the animalculae which infest the brain—a beingsswhich we, in consequence, regard as purely inanimate and materialssmuch in the same manner as these animalculae must thus regard us.ssOur telescopes and our mathematical investigations assure us onssevery hand—notwithstanding the cant of the more ignorant of thesspriesthood—that space, and therefore that bulk, is an importantssconsideration in the eyes of the Almighty. The cycles in whichssthe stars move are those best adapted for the evolution, withoutsscollision, of the greatest possible number of bodies. The formsssof those bodies are accurately such as, within a given surface,ssto include the greatest possible amount of matter;—while thesssurfaces themselves are so disposed as to accommodate a densersspopulation than could be accommodated on the same surfacesssotherwise arranged. Nor is it any argument against bulk being anssobject with God, that space itself is infinite; for there may bessan infinity of matter to fill it. And since we see clearly thatssthe endowment of matter with vitality is a principle—indeed, asssfar as our judgments extend, the leading principle in thessoperations of Deity,—it is scarcely logical to imagine itssconfined to the regions of the minute, where we daily trace it,ssand not extending to those of the august. As we find cycle withinsscycle without end,—yet all revolving around one far-distantsscentre which is the God-head, may we not analogically suppose inssthe same manner, life within life, the less within the greater,ssand all within the Spirit Divine? In short, we are madly erring,ssthrough self-esteem, in believing man, in either his temporal orssfuture destinies, to be of more moment in the universe than thatssvast “clod of the valley” which he tills and contemns, and tosswhich he denies a soul for no more profound reason than that hessdoes not behold it in operation. (*2)ssThese fancies, and such as these, have always given to myssmeditations among the mountains and the forests, by the riversssand the ocean, a tinge of what the everyday world would not failssto term fantastic. My wanderings amid such scenes have been many,ssand far-searching, and often solitary; and the interest withsswhich I have strayed through many a dim, deep valley, or gazedssinto the reflected Heaven of many a bright lake, has been anssinterest greatly deepened by the thought that I have strayed andssgazed alone. What flippant Frenchman was it who said in allusionssto the well-known work of Zimmerman, that, “la solitude est unessbelle chose; mais il faut quelqu’un pour vous dire que lasssolitude est une belle chose?” The epigram cannot be gainsayed;ssbut the necessity is a thing that does not exist.ssIt was during one of my lonely journeyings, amid a far distantssregion of mountain locked within mountain, and sad rivers andssmelancholy tarn writhing or sleeping within all—that I chancedssupon a certain rivulet and island. I came upon them suddenly inssthe leafy June, and threw myself upon the turf, beneath thessbranches of an unknown odorous shrub, that I might doze as Isscontemplated the scene. I felt that thus only should I look uponssit—such was the character of phantasm which it wore.ssOn all sides—save to the west, where the sun was aboutsssinking—arose the verdant walls of the forest. The little riversswhich turned sharply in its course, and was thus immediately lostssto sight, seemed to have no exit from its prison, but to bessabsorbed by the deep green foliage of the trees to the east—whilessin the opposite quarter (so it appeared to me as I lay at lengthssand glanced upward) there poured down noiselessly andsscontinuously into the valley, a rich golden and crimson waterfallssfrom the sunset fountains of the sky.ssAbout midway in the short vista which my dreamy vision took in,ssone small circular island, profusely verdured, reposed upon thessbosom of the stream.ssSo blended bank and shadow theressThat each seemed pendulous in air—ssso mirror-like was the glassy water, that it was scarcelysspossible to say at what point upon the slope of the emerald turfssits crystal dominion began.ssMy position enabled me to include in a single view both thesseastern and western extremities of the islet; and I observed asssingularly-marked difference in their aspects. The latter was allssone radiant harem of garden beauties. It glowed and blushedssbeneath the eyes of the slant sunlight, and fairly laughed withssflowers. The grass was short, springy, sweet-scented, andssasphodel-interspersed. The trees were lithe, mirthful,sserect—bright, slender, and graceful,—of Eastern figure andssfoliage, with bark smooth, glossy, and parti-colored. Theressseemed a deep sense of life and joy about all; and although nossairs blew from out the heavens, yet every thing had motionssthrough the gentle sweepings to and fro of innumerablessbutterflies, that might have been mistaken for tulips with wings.ss(*4)ssThe other or eastern end of the isle was whelmed in the blackestssshade. A sombre, yet beautiful and peaceful gloom here pervadedssall things. The trees were dark in color, and mournful in formssand attitude, wreathing themselves into sad, solemn, and spectralssshapes that conveyed ideas of mortal sorrow and untimely death.ssThe grass wore the deep tint of the cypress, and the heads of itsssblades hung droopingly, and hither and thither among it were manysssmall unsightly hillocks, low and narrow, and not very long, thatsshad the aspect of graves, but were not; although over and allssabout them the rue and the rosemary clambered. The shade of thesstrees fell heavily upon the water, and seemed to bury itselfsstherein, impregnating the depths of the element with darkness. Issfancied that each shadow, as the sun descended lower and lower,ssseparated itself sullenly from the trunk that gave it birth, andssthus became absorbed by the stream; while other shadows issuedssmomently from the trees, taking the place of their predecessorsssthus entombed.ssThis idea, having once seized upon my fancy, greatly excited it,ssand I lost myself forthwith in revery. “If ever island weressenchanted,” said I to myself, “this is it. This is the haunt ofssthe few gentle Fays who remain from the wreck of the race. Aressthese green tombs theirs?—or do they yield up their sweet livesssas mankind yield up their own? In dying, do they not rather wastessaway mournfully, rendering unto God, little by little, theirssexistence, as these trees render up shadow after shadow,ssexhausting their substance unto dissolution? What the wastingsstree is to the water that imbibes its shade, growing thus blackerssby what it preys upon, may not the life of the Fay be to thessdeath which engulfs it?”ssAs I thus mused, with half-shut eyes, while the sun sank rapidlyssto rest, and eddying currents careered round and round thessisland, bearing upon their bosom large, dazzling, white flakes ofssthe bark of the sycamore—flakes which, in their multiformsspositions upon the water, a quick imagination might havessconverted into anything it pleased—while I thus mused, itssappeared to me that the form of one of those very Fays about whomssI had been pondering made its way slowly into the darkness fromssout the light at the western end of the island. She stood erectssin a singularly fragile canoe, and urged it with the mere phantomssof an oar. While within the influence of the lingering sunbeams,ssher attitude seemed indicative of joy—but sorrow deformed it asssshe passed within the shade. Slowly she glided along, and atsslength rounded the islet and re-entered the region of light. “Thessrevolution which has just been made by the Fay,” continued I,ssmusingly, “is the cycle of the brief year of her life. She hasssfloated through her winter and through her summer. She is a yearssnearer unto Death; for I did not fail to see that, as she camessinto the shade, her shadow fell from her, and was swallowed up inssthe dark water, making its blackness more black.”ssAnd again the boat appeared and the Fay; but about the attitudessof the latter there was more of care and uncertainty and less ofsselastic joy. She floated again from out the light and into thessgloom (which deepened momently) and again her shadow fell fromssher into the ebony water, and became absorbed into its blackness.ssAnd again and again she made the circuit of the island, (whilessthe sun rushed down to his slumbers), and at each issuing intossthe light there was more sorrow about her person, while it grewssfeebler and far fainter and more indistinct, and at each passagessinto the gloom there fell from her a darker shade, which becamesswhelmed in a shadow more black. But at length when the sun hadssutterly departed, the Fay, now the mere ghost of her former self,sswent disconsolately with her boat into the region of the ebonyssflood—and that she issued thence at all I cannot say, forssdarkness fell over all things and I beheld her magical figure nossmore.ssTHE ASSIGNATIONssStay for me there! I will not fail.ssTo meet thee in that hollow vale.

(_Exequy on the death of his wife, by Henry King, Bishop of
Chichester_.)ssIll-fated and mysterious man!—bewildered in the brilliancy ofssthine own imagination, and fallen in the flames of thine ownssyouth! Again in fancy I behold thee! Once more thy form hathssrisen before me!—not—oh! not as thou art—in the cold valley andssshadow—but as thou _shouldst be_—squandering away a life ofssmagnificent meditation in that city of dim visions, thine ownssVenice—which is a star-beloved Elysium of the sea, and the widesswindows of whose Palladian palaces look down with a deep andssbitter meaning upon the secrets of her silent waters. Yes! Issrepeat it—as thou _shouldst be_. There are surely other worldsssthan this—other thoughts than the thoughts of the multitude—otherssspeculations than the speculations of the sophist. Who then shallsscall thy conduct into question? who blame thee for thy visionarysshours, or denounce those occupations as a wasting away of life,sswhich were but the overflowings of thine everlasting energies?ssIt was at Venice, beneath the covered archway there called thess_Ponte di Sospiri_, that I met for the third or fourth time thessperson of whom I speak. It is with a confused recollection that Issbring to mind the circumstances of that meeting. Yet Issremember—ah! how should I forget?—the deep midnight, the Bridgessof Sighs, the beauty of woman, and the Genius of Romance thatssstalked up and down the narrow canal.ssIt was a night of unusual gloom. The great clock of the Piazzasshad sounded the fifth hour of the Italian evening. The square ofssthe Campanile lay silent and deserted, and the lights in the oldssDucal Palace were dying fast away. I was returning home from thessPiazetta, by way of the Grand Canal. But as my gondola arrivedssopposite the mouth of the canal San Marco, a female voice fromssits recesses broke suddenly upon the night, in one wild,sshysterical, and long continued shriek. Startled at the sound, Isssprang upon my feet: while the gondolier, letting slip his singlessoar, lost it in the pitchy darkness beyond a chance of recovery,ssand we were consequently left to the guidance of the currentsswhich here sets from the greater into the smaller channel. Likesssome huge and sable-feathered condor, we were slowly driftingssdown towards the Bridge of Sighs, when a thousand flambeauxssflashing from the windows, and down the staircases of the DucalssPalace, turned all at once that deep gloom into a livid andsspreternatural day.ssA child, slipping from the arms of its own mother, had fallenssfrom an upper window of the lofty structure into the deep and dimsscanal. The quiet waters had closed placidly over their victim;ssand, although my own gondola was the only one in sight, many assstout swimmer, already in the stream, was seeking in vain uponssthe surface, the treasure which was to be found, alas! onlysswithin the abyss. Upon the broad black marble flagstones at thessentrance of the palace, and a few steps above the water, stood assfigure which none who then saw can have ever since forgotten. Itsswas the Marchesa Aphrodite—the adoration of all Venice—the gayestssof the gay—the most lovely where all were beautiful—but still thessyoung wife of the old and intriguing Mentoni, and the mother ofssthat fair child, her first and only one, who now, deep beneathssthe murky water, was thinking in bitterness of heart upon hersssweet caresses, and exhausting its little life in struggles tosscall upon her name.ssShe stood alone. Her small, bare, and silvery feet gleamed in thessblack mirror of marble beneath her. Her hair, not as yet moressthan half loosened for the night from its ball-room array,ssclustered, amid a shower of diamonds, round and round herssclassical head, in curls like those of the young hyacinth. Asssnowy-white and gauze-like drapery seemed to be nearly the solesscovering to her delicate form; but the mid-summer and midnightssair was hot, sullen, and still, and no motion in the statue-likessform itself, stirred even the folds of that raiment of very vaporsswhich hung around it as the heavy marble hangs around the Niobe.ssYet—strange to say!—her large lustrous eyes were not turnedssdownwards upon that grave wherein her brightest hope layssburied—but riveted in a widely different direction! The prison ofssthe Old Republic is, I think, the stateliest building in allssVenice—but how could that lady gaze so fixedly upon it, whenssbeneath her lay stifling her only child? Yon dark, gloomy niche,sstoo, yawns right opposite her chamber window—what, then, _could_ssthere be in its shadows—in its architecture—in its ivy-wreathedssand solemn cornices—that the Marchesa di Mentoni had not wonderedssat a thousand times before? Nonsense!—Who does not remember that,ssat such a time as this, the eye, like a shattered mirror,ssmultiplies the images of its sorrow, and sees in innumerablessfar-off places, the woe which is close at hand?ssMany steps above the Marchesa, and within the arch of thesswater-gate, stood, in full dress, the Satyr-like figure ofssMentoni himself. He was occasionally occupied in thrumming assguitar, and seemed _ennuye_ to the very death, as at intervals hessgave directions for the recovery of his child. Stupefied andssaghast, I had myself no power to move from the upright position Isshad assumed upon first hearing the shriek, and must havesspresented to the eyes of the agitated group a spectral andssominous appearance, as with pale countenance and rigid limbs, Issfloated down among them in that funereal gondola.ssAll efforts proved in vain. Many of the most energetic in thesssearch were relaxing their exertions, and yielding to a gloomysssorrow. There seemed but little hope for the child; (how muchssless than for the mother!) but now, from the interior of thatssdark niche which has been already mentioned as forming a part ofssthe Old Republican prison, and as fronting the lattice of thessMarchesa, a figure muffled in a cloak, stepped out within reachssof the light, and, pausing a moment upon the verge of the giddyssdescent, plunged headlong into the canal. As, in an instantssafterwards, he stood with the still living and breathing childsswithin his grasp, upon the marble flagstones by the side of thessMarchesa, his cloak, heavy with the drenching water, becamessunfastened, and, falling in folds about his feet, discovered tossthe wonder-stricken spectators the graceful person of a veryssyoung man, with the sound of whose name the greater part ofssEurope was then ringing.ssNo word spoke the deliverer. But the Marchesa! She will nowssreceive her child—she will press it to her heart—she will clingssto its little form, and smother it with her caresses. Alas!ss_another’s_ arms have taken it from the stranger—_another’s_ armssshave taken it away, and borne it afar off, unnoticed, into thesspalace! And the Marchesa! Her lip—her beautiful lip trembles;sstears are gathering in her eyes—those eyes which, like Pliny’sssacanthus, are “soft and almost liquid.” Yes! tears are gatheringssin those eyes—and see! the entire woman thrills throughout thesssoul, and the statue has started into life! The pallor of thessmarble countenance, the swelling of the marble bosom, the verysspurity of the marble feet, we behold suddenly flushed over with asstide of ungovernable crimson; and a slight shudder quivers aboutssher delicate frame, as a gentle air at Napoli about the richsssilver lilies in the grass.ssWhy _should_ that lady blush! To this demand there is nossanswer—except that, having left, in the eager haste and terror ofssa mother’s heart, the privacy of her own _boudoir_, she hasssneglected to enthral her tiny feet in their slippers, and utterlyssforgotten to throw over her Venetian shoulders that drapery whichssis their due. What other possible reason could there have beenssfor her so blushing?—for the glance of those wild appealingsseyes?—for the unusual tumult of that throbbing bosom?—for thessconvulsive pressure of that trembling hand?—that hand which fell,ssas Mentoni turned into the palace, accidentally, upon the hand ofssthe stranger. What reason could there have been for the low—thesssingularly low tone of those unmeaning words which the ladyssuttered hurriedly in bidding him adieu? “Thou hast conquered,”ssshe said, or the murmurs of the water deceived me; “thou hastssconquered—one hour after sunrise—we shall meet—so let it be!”ssThe tumult had subsided, the lights had died away within thesspalace, and the stranger, whom I now recognized, stood alone uponssthe flags. He shook with inconceivable agitation, and his eyessglanced around in search of a gondola. I could not do less thanssoffer him the service of my own; and he accepted the civility.ssHaving obtained an oar at the water-gate, we proceeded togetherssto his residence, while he rapidly recovered his self-possession,ssand spoke of our former slight acquaintance in terms of greatssapparent cordiality.ssThere are some subjects upon which I take pleasure in beingssminute. The person of the stranger—let me call him by this title,sswho to all the world was still a stranger—the person of thessstranger is one of these subjects. In height he might have beenssbelow rather than above the medium size: although there weressmoments of intense passion when his frame actually _expanded_ andssbelied the assertion. The light, almost slender symmetry of hisssfigure, promised more of that ready activity which he evinced atssthe Bridge of Sighs, than of that Herculean strength which he hasssbeen known to wield without an effort, upon occasions of moressdangerous emergency. With the mouth and chin of a deity—singular,sswild, full, liquid eyes, whose shadows varied from pure hazel tossintense and brilliant jet—and a profusion of curling, black hair,ssfrom which a forehead of unusual breadth gleamed forth atssintervals all light and ivory—his were features than which I havessseen none more classically regular, except, perhaps, the marblessones of the Emperor Commodus. Yet his countenance was,ssnevertheless, one of those which all men have seen at some periodssof their lives, and have never afterwards seen again. It had nosspeculiar, it had no settled predominant expression to be fastenedssupon the memory; a countenance seen and instantly forgotten, butssforgotten with a vague and never-ceasing desire of recalling itssto mind. Not that the spirit of each rapid passion failed, at anysstime, to throw its own distinct image upon the mirror of thatssface—but that the mirror, mirror-like, retained no vestige of thesspassion, when the passion had departed.ssUpon leaving him on the night of our adventure, he solicited me,ssin what I thought an urgent manner, to call upon him _very_ earlyssthe next morning. Shortly after sunrise, I found myselfssaccordingly at his Palazzo, one of those huge structures ofssgloomy, yet fantastic pomp, which tower above the waters of thessGrand Canal in the vicinity of the Rialto. I was shown up a broadsswinding staircase of mosaics, into an apartment whosessunparalleled splendor burst through the opening door with anssactual glare, making me blind and dizzy with luxuriousness.ssI knew my acquaintance to be wealthy. Report had spoken of hissspossessions in terms which I had even ventured to call terms ofssridiculous exaggeration. But as I gazed about me, I could notssbring myself to believe that the wealth of any subject in Europesscould have supplied the princely magnificence which burned andssblazed around.ssAlthough, as I say, the sun had arisen, yet the room was stillssbrilliantly lighted up. I judge from this circumstance, as wellssas from an air of exhaustion in the countenance of my friend,ssthat he had not retired to bed during the whole of the precedingssnight. In the architecture and embellishments of the chamber, thessevident design had been to dazzle and astound. Little attentionsshad been paid to the _decora_ of what is technically calledss_keeping_, or to the proprieties of nationality. The eye wanderedssfrom object to object, and rested upon none—neither thess_grotesques_ of the Greek painters, nor the sculptures of thessbest Italian days, nor the huge carvings of untutored Egypt. Richssdraperies in every part of the room trembled to the vibration ofsslow, melancholy music, whose origin was not to be discovered. Thesssenses were oppressed by mingled and conflicting perfumes,ssreeking up from strange convolute censers, together withssmultitudinous flaring and flickering tongues of emerald andssviolet fire. The rays of the newly risen sun poured in upon thesswhole, through windows, formed each of a single pane ofsscrimson-tinted glass. Glancing to and fro, in a thousandssreflections, from curtains which rolled from their cornices likesscataracts of molten silver, the beams of natural glory mingled atsslength fitfully with the artificial light, and lay weltering insssubdued masses upon a carpet of rich, liquid-looking cloth ofssChili gold.ss“Ha! ha! ha!—ha! ha! ha!”—laughed the proprietor, motioning me tossa seat as I entered the room, and throwing himself back atssfull-length upon an ottoman. “I see,” said he, perceiving that Isscould not immediately reconcile myself to the _bienseance_ of sosssingular a welcome—“I see you are astonished at my apartment—atssmy statues—my pictures—my originality of conception inssarchitecture and upholstery! absolutely drunk, eh, with myssmagnificence? But pardon me, my dear sir, (here his tone of voicessdropped to the very spirit of cordiality,) pardon me for myssuncharitable laughter. You appeared so _utterly_ astonished.ssBesides, some things are so completely ludicrous, that a manss_must_ laugh or die. To die laughing, must be the most gloriousssof all glorious deaths! Sir Thomas More—a very fine man was SirssThomas More—Sir Thomas More died laughing, you remember. Also inssthe _Absurdities_ of Ravisius Textor, there is a long list ofsscharacters who came to the same magnificent end. Do you know,sshowever,” continued he musingly, “that at Sparta (which is nowssPalæochori,) at Sparta, I say, to the west of the citadel, amongssa chaos of scarcely visible ruins, is a kind of _socle_, uponsswhich are still legible the letters ΛΑΞΜ. They are undoubtedlysspart of ΓΕΛΑΞΜΑ. Now, at Sparta were a thousand temples andssshrines to a thousand different divinities. How exceedinglyssstrange that the altar of Laughter should have survived all thessothers! But in the present instance,” he resumed, with a singularssalteration of voice and manner, “I have no right to be merry atssyour expense. You might well have been amazed. Europe cannotssproduce anything so fine as this, my little regal cabinet. Myssother apartments are by no means of the same order—mere _ultras_ssof fashionable insipidity. This is better than fashion—is it not?ssYet this has but to be seen to become the rage—that is, withssthose who could afford it at the cost of their entire patrimony.ssI have guarded, however, against any such profanation. With onessexception, you are the only human being besides myself and myss_valet_, who has been admitted within the mysteries of thesessimperial precincts, since they have been bedizened as you see!”ssI bowed in acknowledgment—for the overpowering sense of splendorssand perfume, and music, together with the unexpected eccentricityssof his address and manner, prevented me from expressing, insswords, my appreciation of what I might have construed into asscompliment.ss“Here,” he resumed, arising and leaning on my arm as he saunteredssaround the apartment, “here are paintings from the Greeks tossCimabue, and from Cimabue to the present hour. Many are chosen,ssas you see, with little deference to the opinions of Virtu. Theyssare all, however, fitting tapestry for a chamber such as this.ssHere, too, are some _chefs d’oeuvre_ of the unknown great; andsshere, unfinished designs by men, celebrated in their day, whosessvery names the perspicacity of the academies has left to silencessand to me. What think you,” said he, turning abruptly as hessspoke—“what think you of this Madonna della Pieta?”ss“It is Guido’s own!” I said, with all the enthusiasm of myssnature, for I had been poring intently over its surpassingssloveliness. “It is Guido’s own!—how _could_ you have obtainedssit?—she is undoubtedly in painting what the Venus is insssculpture.”ss“Ha!” said he thoughtfully, “the Venus—the beautiful Venus?—thessVenus of the Medici?—she of the diminutive head and the gildedsshair? Part of the left arm (here his voice dropped so as to bessheard with difficulty,) and all the right, are restorations; andssin the coquetry of that right arm lies, I think, the quintessencessof all affectation. Give _me_ the Canova! The Apollo, too, is asscopy—there can be no doubt of it—blind fool that I am, who cannotssbehold the boasted inspiration of the Apollo! I cannot help—pityssme!—I cannot help preferring the Antinous. Was it not Socratessswho said that the statuary found his statue in the block ofssmarble? Then Michael Angelo was by no means original in hissscouplet—ss‘Non ha l’ottimo artista alcun concettossChe un marmo solo in se non circunscriva.’”ssIt has been, or should be remarked, that, in the manner of thesstrue gentleman, we are always aware of a difference from thessbearing of the vulgar, without being at once precisely able tossdetermine in what such difference consists. Allowing the remarkssto have applied in its full force to the outward demeanor of myssacquaintance, I felt it, on that eventful morning, still moressfully applicable to his moral temperament and character. Nor canssI better define that peculiarity of spirit which seemed to placesshim so essentially apart from all other human beings, than bysscalling it a _habit_ of intense and continual thought, pervadingsseven his most trivial actions—intruding upon his moments ofssdalliance—and interweaving itself with his very flashes ofssmerriment—like adders which writhe from out the eyes of thessgrinning masks in the cornices around the temples of Persepolis.ssI could not help, however, repeatedly observing, through thessmingled tone of levity and solemnity with which he rapidlyssdescanted upon matters of little importance, a certain air ofsstrepidation—a degree of nervous _unction_ in action and inssspeech—an unquiet excitability of manner which appeared to me atssall times unaccountable, and upon some occasions even filled messwith alarm. Frequently, too, pausing in the middle of a sentencesswhose commencement he had apparently forgotten, he seemed to besslistening in the deepest attention, as if either in momentaryssexpectation of a visitor, or to sounds which must have hadssexistence in his imagination alone.ssIt was during one of these reveries or pauses of apparentssabstraction, that, in turning over a page of the poet and scholarssPolitian’s beautiful tragedy “The Orfeo,” (the first nativessItalian tragedy,) which lay near me upon an ottoman, I discoveredssa passage underlined in pencil. It was a passage towards the endssof the third act—a passage of the most heart-stirringssexcitement—a passage which, although tainted with impurity, nossman shall read without a thrill of novel emotion—no woman withoutssa sigh. The whole page was blotted with fresh tears; and, uponssthe opposite interleaf, were the following English lines, writtenssin a hand so very different from the peculiar characters of myssacquaintance, that I had some difficulty in recognising it as hisssown:—

Thou wast that all to me, love,ssFor which my soul did pine—
A green isle in the sea, love,ssA fountain and a shrine,
All wreathed with fairy fruits and flowers;ssAnd all the flowers were mine.

Ah, dream too bright to last!ssAh, starry Hope, that didst arise
But to be overcast!ssA voice from out the Future cries,
“Onward!”—but o’er the Pastss(Dim gulf!) my spirit hovering lies,
Mute—motionless—aghast!

For alas!  alas!  with messThe light of life is o’er.
“No more—no more—no more,”ss(Such language holds the solemn sea
To the sands upon the shore,)ssShall bloom the thunder-blasted tree,
Or the stricken eagle soar!

Now all my hours are trances;ssAnd all my nightly dreams
Are where the dark eye glances,ssAnd where thy footstep gleams,
In what ethereal dances,ssBy what Italian streams.

Alas!  for that accursed timessThey bore thee o’er the billow,
From Love to titled age and crime,ssAnd an unholy pillow!—
From me, and from our misty clime,ssWhere weeps the silver willow!ssThat these lines were written in English—a language with which Isshad not believed their author acquainted—afforded me littlessmatter for surprise. I was too well aware of the extent of hisssacquirements, and of the singular pleasure he took in concealingssthem from observation, to be astonished at any similar discovery;ssbut the place of date, I must confess, occasioned me no littlessamazement. It had been originally written _London_, andssafterwards carefully overscored—not, however, so effectually asssto conceal the word from a scrutinizing eye. I say, thisssoccasioned me no little amazement; for I well remember that, in assformer conversation with a friend, I particularly inquired if hesshad at any time met in London the Marchesa di Mentoni, (who forsssome years previous to her marriage had resided in that city,)sswhen his answer, if I mistake not, gave me to understand that hesshad never visited the metropolis of Great Britain. I might assswell here mention, that I have more than once heard, (without, ofsscourse, giving credit to a report involving so manyssimprobabilities,) that the person of whom I speak, was not onlyssby birth, but in education, an _Englishman_.

“There is one painting,” said he, without being aware of my notice of
the tragedy—“there is still one painting which you have not seen.” And
throwing aside a drapery, he discovered a full-length portrait of the
Marchesa Aphrodite.

Human art could have done no more in the delineation of her superhuman
beauty. The same ethereal figure which stood before me the preceding
night upon the steps of the Ducal Palace, stood before me once again.
But in the expression of the countenance, which was beaming all over
with smiles, there still lurked (incomprehensible anomaly!) that fitful
stain of melancholy which will ever be found inseparable from the
perfection of the beautiful. Her right arm lay folded over her bosom.
With her left she pointed downward to a curiously fashioned vase. One
small, fairy foot, alone visible, barely touched the earth; and,
scarcely discernible in the brilliant atmosphere which seemed to
encircle and enshrine her loveliness, floated a pair of the most
delicately imagined wings. My glance fell from the painting to the
figure of my friend, and the vigorous words of Chapman’s _Bussy
D’Ambois_, quivered instinctively upon my lips:ss“He is up
There like a Roman statue!  He will stand
Till Death hath made him marble!”ss“Come,” he said at length, turning towards a table of richlyssenamelled and massive silver, upon which were a few gobletsssfantastically stained, together with two large Etruscan vases,ssfashioned in the same extraordinary model as that in thessforeground of the portrait, and filled with what I supposed to bessJohannisberger. “Come,” he said, abruptly, “let us drink! It isssearly—but let us drink. It is _indeed_ early,” he continued,ssmusingly, as a cherub with a heavy golden hammer made thessapartment ring with the first hour after sunrise: “It is _indeed_ssearly—but what matters it? let us drink! Let us pour out anssoffering to yon solemn sun which these gaudy lamps and censersssare so eager to subdue!” And, having made me pledge him in assbumper, he swallowed in rapid succession several goblets of thesswine.ss“To dream,” he continued, resuming the tone of his desultoryssconversation, as he held up to the rich light of a censer one ofssthe magnificent vases—“to dream has been the business of my life.ssI have therefore framed for myself, as you see, a bower ofssdreams. In the heart of Venice could I have erected a better? Youssbehold around you, it is true, a medley of architecturalssembellishments. The chastity of Ionia is offended by antediluvianssdevices, and the sphynxes of Egypt are outstretched upon carpetsssof gold. Yet the effect is incongruous to the timid alone.ssProprieties of place, and especially of time, are the bugbearssswhich terrify mankind from the contemplation of the magnificent.ssOnce I was myself a decorist; but that sublimation of folly hassspalled upon my soul. All this is now the fitter for my purpose.ssLike these arabesque censers, my spirit is writhing in fire, andssthe delirium of this scene is fashioning me for the wilderssvisions of that land of real dreams whither I am now rapidlyssdeparting.” He here paused abruptly, bent his head to his bosom,ssand seemed to listen to a sound which I could not hear. Atsslength, erecting his frame, he looked upwards, and ejaculated thesslines of the Bishop of Chichester:ss_“Stay for me there!  I will not fail_ss_To meet thee in that hollow vale.”_ssIn the next instant, confessing the power of the wine, he threwsshimself at full-length upon an ottoman.ssA quick step was now heard upon the staircase, and a loud knockssat the door rapidly succeeded. I was hastening to anticipate asssecond disturbance, when a page of Mentoni’s household burst intossthe room, and faltered out, in a voice choking with emotion, thessincoherent words, “My mistress!—my mistress!—Poisoned!—poisoned!ssOh, beautiful—oh, beautiful Aphrodite!”ssBewildered, I flew to the ottoman, and endeavored to arouse thesssleeper to a sense of the startling intelligence. But his limbssswere rigid—his lips were livid—his lately beaming eyes weressriveted in _death_. I staggered back towards the table—my handssfell upon a cracked and blackened goblet—and a consciousness ofssthe entire and terrible truth flashed suddenly over my soul.ssTHE PIT AND THE PENDULUMssImpia tortorum longos hic turba furoresssSanguinis innocui, non satiata, aluit.ssSospite nunc patria, fracto nunc funeris antro,ssMors ubi dira fuit vita salusque patent.

[_Quatrain composed for the gates of a market to be erected upon the
site of the Jacobin Club House at Paris_.]ssI was sick—sick unto death with that long agony; and when they atsslength unbound me, and I was permitted to sit, I felt that mysssenses were leaving me. The sentence—the dread sentence ofssdeath—was the last of distinct accentuation which reached myssears. After that, the sound of the inquisitorial voices seemedssmerged in one dreamy indeterminate hum. It conveyed to my soulssthe idea of _revolution_—perhaps from its association in fancysswith the burr of a mill wheel. This only for a brief period, forsspresently I heard no more. Yet, for a while, I saw—but with howssterrible an exaggeration! I saw the lips of the black-robedssjudges. They appeared to me white—whiter than the sheet uponsswhich I trace these words—and thin even to grotesqueness; thinsswith the intensity of their expression of firmness—of immoveablessresolution—of stern contempt of human torture. I saw that thessdecrees of what to me was Fate, were still issuing from thosesslips. I saw them writhe with a deadly locution. I saw themssfashion the syllables of my name; and I shuddered because nosssound succeeded. I saw, too, for a few moments of delirioussshorror, the soft and nearly imperceptible waving of the sablessdraperies which enwrapped the walls of the apartment. And then myssvision fell upon the seven tall candles upon the table. At firstssthey wore the aspect of charity, and seemed white and slenderssangels who would save me; but then, all at once, there came assmost deadly nausea over my spirit, and I felt every fibre in myssframe thrill as if I had touched the wire of a galvanic battery,sswhile the angel forms became meaningless spectres, with heads ofssflame, and I saw that from them there would be no help. And thenssthere stole into my fancy, like a rich musical note, the thoughtssof what sweet rest there must be in the grave. The thought camessgently and stealthily, and it seemed long before it attained fullssappreciation; but just as my spirit came at length properly tossfeel and entertain it, the figures of the judges vanished, as ifssmagically, from before me; the tall candles sank intossnothingness; their flames went out utterly; the blackness ofssdarkness supervened; all sensations appeared swallowed up in assmad rushing descent as of the soul into Hades. Then silence, andssstillness, night were the universe.ssI had swooned; but still will not say that all of consciousnesssswas lost. What of it there remained I will not attempt to define,ssor even to describe; yet all was not lost. In the deepestssslumber—no! In delirium—no! In a swoon—no! In death—no! even inssthe grave all is not lost. Else there is no immortality for man.ssArousing from the most profound of slumbers, we break thessgossamer web of some dream. Yet in a second afterward, (so frailssmay that web have been) we remember not that we have dreamed. Inssthe return to life from the swoon there are two stages; first,ssthat of the sense of mental or spiritual; secondly, that of thesssense of physical, existence. It seems probable that if, uponssreaching the second stage, we could recall the impressions of thessfirst, we should find these impressions eloquent in memories ofssthe gulf beyond. And that gulf is—what? How at least shall wessdistinguish its shadows from those of the tomb? But if thessimpressions of what I have termed the first stage are not, atsswill, recalled, yet, after long interval, do they not comessunbidden, while we marvel whence they come? He who has neverssswooned, is not he who finds strange palaces and wildly familiarssfaces in coals that glow; is not he who beholds floating inssmid-air the sad visions that the many may not view; is not he whossponders over the perfume of some novel flower; is not he whosessbrain grows bewildered with the meaning of some musical cadencesswhich has never before arrested his attention.ssAmid frequent and thoughtful endeavors to remember; amid earnestssstruggles to regather some token of the state of seemingssnothingness into which my soul had lapsed, there have beenssmoments when I have dreamed of success; there have been brief,ssvery brief periods when I have conjured up remembrances which thesslucid reason of a later epoch assures me could have had referencessonly to that condition of seeming unconsciousness. These shadowsssof memory tell, indistinctly, of tall figures that lifted andssbore me in silence down—down—still down—till a hideous dizzinessssoppressed me at the mere idea of the interminableness of thessdescent. They tell also of a vague horror at my heart, on accountssof that heart’s unnatural stillness. Then comes a sense of suddenssmotionlessness throughout all things; as if those who bore me (assghastly train!) had outrun, in their descent, the limits of thesslimitless, and paused from the wearisomeness of their toil. Afterssthis I call to mind flatness and dampness; and then all isssmadness—the madness of a memory which busies itself amongssforbidden things.ssVery suddenly there came back to my soul motion and sound—thesstumultuous motion of the heart, and, in my ears, the sound of itsssbeating. Then a pause in which all is blank. Then again sound,ssand motion, and touch—a tingling sensation pervading my frame.ssThen the mere consciousness of existence, without thought—asscondition which lasted long. Then, very suddenly, thought, andssshuddering terror, and earnest endeavor to comprehend my truessstate. Then a strong desire to lapse into insensibility. Then assrushing revival of soul and a successful effort to move. And nowssa full memory of the trial, of the judges, of the sablessdraperies, of the sentence, of the sickness, of the swoon. Thenssentire forgetfulness of all that followed; of all that a laterssday and much earnestness of endeavor have enabled me vaguely tossrecall.ssSo far, I had not opened my eyes. I felt that I lay upon my back,ssunbound. I reached out my hand, and it fell heavily uponsssomething damp and hard. There I suffered it to remain for manyssminutes, while I strove to imagine where and what I could be. Isslonged, yet dared not to employ my vision. I dreaded the firstssglance at objects around me. It was not that I feared to lookssupon things horrible, but that I grew aghast lest there should bessnothing to see. At length, with a wild desperation at heart, Issquickly unclosed my eyes. My worst thoughts, then, weressconfirmed. The blackness of eternal night encompassed me. Issstruggled for breath. The intensity of the darkness seemed tossoppress and stifle me. The atmosphere was intolerably close. Issstill lay quietly, and made effort to exercise my reason. Issbrought to mind the inquisitorial proceedings, and attempted fromssthat point to deduce my real condition. The sentence had passed;ssand it appeared to me that a very long interval of time had sincesselapsed. Yet not for a moment did I suppose myself actually dead.ssSuch a supposition, notwithstanding what we read in fiction, isssaltogether inconsistent with real existence;—but where and insswhat state was I? The condemned to death, I knew, perishedssusually at the autos-da-fe, and one of these had been held on thessvery night of the day of my trial. Had I been remanded to myssdungeon, to await the next sacrifice, which would not take placessfor many months? This I at once saw could not be. Victims hadssbeen in immediate demand. Moreover, my dungeon, as well as allssthe condemned cells at Toledo, had stone floors, and light wasssnot altogether excluded.ssA fearful idea now suddenly drove the blood in torrents upon myssheart, and for a brief period, I once more relapsed intossinsensibility. Upon recovering, I at once started to my feet,sstrembling convulsively in every fibre. I thrust my arms wildlyssabove and around me in all directions. I felt nothing; yetssdreaded to move a step, lest I should be impeded by the walls ofssa tomb. Perspiration burst from every pore, and stood in cold bigssbeads upon my forehead. The agony of suspense grew at lengthssintolerable, and I cautiously moved forward, with my armsssextended, and my eyes straining from their sockets, in the hopessof catching some faint ray of light. I proceeded for many paces;ssbut still all was blackness and vacancy. I breathed more freely.ssIt seemed evident that mine was not, at least, the most hideousssof fates.ssAnd now, as I still continued to step cautiously onward, theresscame thronging upon my recollection a thousand vague rumors ofssthe horrors of Toledo. Of the dungeons there had been strangessthings narrated—fables I had always deemed them—but yet strange,ssand too ghastly to repeat, save in a whisper. Was I left tossperish of starvation in this subterranean world of darkness; orsswhat fate, perhaps even more fearful, awaited me? That the resultsswould be death, and a death of more than customary bitterness, Issknew too well the character of my judges to doubt. The mode andssthe hour were all that occupied or distracted me.ssMy outstretched hands at length encountered some solidssobstruction. It was a wall, seemingly of stone masonry—verysssmooth, slimy, and cold. I followed it up; stepping with all thesscareful distrust with which certain antique narratives hadssinspired me. This process, however, afforded me no means ofssascertaining the dimensions of my dungeon; as I might make itssscircuit, and return to the point whence I set out, without beingssaware of the fact; so perfectly uniform seemed the wall. Isstherefore sought the knife which had been in my pocket, when ledssinto the inquisitorial chamber; but it was gone; my clothes hadssbeen exchanged for a wrapper of coarse serge. I had thought ofssforcing the blade in some minute crevice of the masonry, so as tossidentify my point of departure. The difficulty, nevertheless, wasssbut trivial; although, in the disorder of my fancy, it seemed atssfirst insuperable. I tore a part of the hem from the robe andssplaced the fragment at full length, and at right angles to thesswall. In groping my way around the prison, I could not fail tossencounter this rag upon completing the circuit. So, at least Issthought: but I had not counted upon the extent of the dungeon, orssupon my own weakness. The ground was moist and slippery. Issstaggered onward for some time, when I stumbled and fell. Myssexcessive fatigue induced me to remain prostrate; and sleep soonssovertook me as I lay.ssUpon awaking, and stretching forth an arm, I found beside me assloaf and a pitcher with water. I was too much exhausted tossreflect upon this circumstance, but ate and drank with avidity.ssShortly afterward, I resumed my tour around the prison, and withssmuch toil came at last upon the fragment of the serge. Up to thessperiod when I fell I had counted fifty-two paces, and uponssresuming my walk, I had counted forty-eight more—when I arrivedssat the rag. There were in all, then, a hundred paces; and,ssadmitting two paces to the yard, I presumed the dungeon to bessfifty yards in circuit. I had met, however, with many angles inssthe wall, and thus I could form no guess at the shape of thessvault, for vault I could not help supposing it to be.ssI had little object—certainly no hope—in these researches; but assvague curiosity prompted me to continue them. Quitting the wall,ssI resolved to cross the area of the enclosure. At first Issproceeded with extreme caution, for the floor, although seeminglyssof solid material, was treacherous with slime. At length,sshowever, I took courage, and did not hesitate to step firmly;ssendeavoring to cross in as direct a line as possible. I hadssadvanced some ten or twelve paces in this manner, when thessremnant of the torn hem of my robe became entangled between mysslegs. I stepped on it, and fell violently on my face.ssIn the confusion attending my fall, I did not immediatelyssapprehend a somewhat startling circumstance, which yet, in a fewssseconds afterward, and while I still lay prostrate, arrested myssattention. It was this: my chin rested upon the floor of thessprison, but my lips and the upper portion of my head, althoughssseemingly at a less elevation than the chin, touched nothing. Atssthe same time my forehead seemed bathed in a clammy vapor, andssthe peculiar smell of decayed fungus arose to my nostrils. I putssforward my arm, and shuddered to find that I had fallen at thessvery brink of a circular pit, whose extent, of course, I had nossmeans of ascertaining at the moment. Groping about the masonryssjust below the margin, I succeeded in dislodging a smallssfragment, and let it fall into the abyss. For many seconds Isshearkened to its reverberations as it dashed against the sides ofssthe chasm in its descent; at length there was a sullen plungessinto water, succeeded by loud echoes. At the same moment theresscame a sound resembling the quick opening, and as rapid closingssof a door overhead, while a faint gleam of light flashed suddenlyssthrough the gloom, and as suddenly faded away.ssI saw clearly the doom which had been prepared for me, andsscongratulated myself upon the timely accident by which I hadssescaped. Another step before my fall, and the world had seen messno more. And the death just avoided, was of that very charactersswhich I had regarded as fabulous and frivolous in the talesssrespecting the Inquisition. To the victims of its tyranny, theresswas the choice of death with its direst physical agonies, orssdeath with its most hideous moral horrors. I had been reservedssfor the latter. By long suffering my nerves had been unstrung,ssuntil I trembled at the sound of my own voice, and had become inssevery respect a fitting subject for the species of torture whichssawaited me.ssShaking in every limb, I groped my way back to the wall—resolvingssthere to perish rather than risk the terrors of the wells, ofsswhich my imagination now pictured many in various positions aboutssthe dungeon. In other conditions of mind I might have had couragessto end my misery at once by a plunge into one of these abysses;ssbut now I was the veriest of cowards. Neither could I forget whatssI had read of these pits—that the sudden extinction of lifessformed no part of their most horrible plan.ssAgitation of spirit kept me awake for many long hours, but atsslength I again slumbered. Upon arousing, I found by my side, asssbefore, a loaf and a pitcher of water. A burning thirst consumedssme, and I emptied the vessel at a draught. It must have beenssdrugged—for scarcely had I drunk, before I became irresistiblyssdrowsy. A deep sleep fell upon me—a sleep like that of death. Howsslong it lasted of course, I know not; but when, once again, Issunclosed my eyes, the objects around me were visible. By a wildsssulphurous lustre, the origin of which I could not at firstssdetermine, I was enabled to see the extent and aspect of thessprison.ssIn its size I had been greatly mistaken. The whole circuit of itssswalls did not exceed twenty-five yards. For some minutes thisssfact occasioned me a world of vain trouble; vain indeed! for whatsscould be of less importance, under the terrible circumstancessswhich environed me, then the mere dimensions of my dungeon? Butssmy soul took a wild interest in trifles, and I busied myself inssendeavors to account for the error I had committed in myssmeasurement. The truth at length flashed upon me. In my firstssattempt at exploration I had counted fifty-two paces, up to thessperiod when I fell; I must then have been within a pace or two ofssthe fragment of serge; in fact, I had nearly performed thesscircuit of the vault. I then slept—and, upon awaking, I must havessreturned upon my steps—thus supposing the circuit nearly doublesswhat it actually was. My confusion of mind prevented me fromssobserving that I began my tour with the wall to the left, andssended it with the wall to the right.ssI had been deceived, too, in respect to the shape of thessenclosure. In feeling my way I had found many angles, and thusssdeduced an idea of great irregularity; so potent is the effect ofsstotal darkness upon one arousing from lethargy or sleep! Thessangles were simply those of a few slight depressions, or niches,ssat odd intervals. The general shape of the prison was square.ssWhat I had taken for masonry seemed now to be iron, or some otherssmetal, in huge plates, whose sutures or joints occasioned thessdepression. The entire surface of this metallic enclosure wasssrudely daubed in all the hideous and repulsive devices to whichssthe charnel superstition of the monks has given rise. The figuresssof fiends in aspects of menace, with skeleton forms, and otherssmore really fearful images, overspread and disfigured the walls.ssI observed that the outlines of these monstrosities weresssufficiently distinct, but that the colors seemed faded andssblurred, as if from the effects of a damp atmosphere. I nowssnoticed the floor, too, which was of stone. In the centre yawnedssthe circular pit from whose jaws I had escaped; but it was thessonly one in the dungeon.ssAll this I saw indistinctly and by much effort—for my personalsscondition had been greatly changed during slumber. I now lay uponssmy back, and at full length, on a species of low framework ofsswood. To this I was securely bound by a long strap resembling asssurcingle. It passed in many convolutions about my limbs andssbody, leaving at liberty only my head, and my left arm to suchssextent that I could, by dint of much exertion, supply myself withssfood from an earthen dish which lay by my side on the floor. Isssaw, to my horror, that the pitcher had been removed. I say to mysshorror—for I was consumed with intolerable thirst. This thirst itssappeared to be the design of my persecutors to stimulate—for thessfood in the dish was meat pungently seasoned.ssLooking upward, I surveyed the ceiling of my prison. It was somessthirty or forty feet overhead, and constructed much as the sidesswalls. In one of its panels a very singular figure riveted mysswhole attention. It was the painted figure of Time as he issscommonly represented, save that, in lieu of a scythe, he heldsswhat, at a casual glance, I supposed to be the pictured image ofssa huge pendulum such as we see on antique clocks. There wassssomething, however, in the appearance of this machine whichsscaused me to regard it more attentively. While I gazed directlyssupward at it (for its position was immediately over my own) Issfancied that I saw it in motion. In an instant afterward thessfancy was confirmed. Its sweep was brief, and of course slow. Isswatched it for some minutes, somewhat in fear, but more insswonder. Wearied at length with observing its dull movement, Issturned my eyes upon the other objects in the cell.ssA slight noise attracted my notice, and, looking to the floor, Isssaw several enormous rats traversing it. They had issued from thesswell, which lay just within view to my right. Even then, while Issgazed, they came up in troops, hurriedly, with ravenous eyes,ssallured by the scent of the meat. From this it required muchsseffort and attention to scare them away.ssIt might have been half an hour, perhaps even an hour, (for Isscould take but imperfect note of time) before I again cast mysseyes upward. What I then saw confounded and amazed me. The sweepssof the pendulum had increased in extent by nearly a yard. As assnatural consequence, its velocity was also much greater. But whatssmainly disturbed me was the idea that had perceptibly descended.ssI now observed—with what horror it is needless to say—that itsssnether extremity was formed of a crescent of glittering steel,ssabout a foot in length from horn to horn; the horns upward, andssthe under edge evidently as keen as that of a razor. Like a razorssalso, it seemed massy and heavy, tapering from the edge into asssolid and broad structure above. It was appended to a weighty rodssof brass, and the whole hissed as it swung through the air.ssI could no longer doubt the doom prepared for me by monkishssingenuity in torture. My cognizance of the pit had become knownssto the inquisitorial agents—_the pit_, whose horrors had beenssdestined for so bold a recusant as myself—the pit, typical ofsshell, and regarded by rumor as the Ultima Thule of all theirsspunishments. The plunge into this pit I had avoided by the merestssof accidents, I knew that surprise, or entrapment into torment,ssformed an important portion of all the grotesquerie of thesessdungeon deaths. Having failed to fall, it was no part of thessdemon plan to hurl me into the abyss; and thus (there being nossalternative) a different and a milder destruction awaited me.ssMilder! I half smiled in my agony as I thought of suchssapplication of such a term.ssWhat boots it to tell of the long, long hours of horror more thanssmortal, during which I counted the rushing vibrations of thesssteel! Inch by inch—line by line—with a descent only appreciablessat intervals that seemed ages—down and still down it came! Dayssspassed—it might have been that many days passed—ere it swept sossclosely over me as to fan me with its acrid breath. The odor ofssthe sharp steel forced itself into my nostrils. I prayed—Isswearied heaven with my prayer for its more speedy descent. I grewssfrantically mad, and struggled to force myself upward against thesssweep of the fearful scimitar. And then I fell suddenly calm, andsslay smiling at the glittering death, as a child at some raressbauble.ssThere was another interval of utter insensibility; it was brief;ssfor, upon again lapsing into life there had been no perceptiblessdescent in the pendulum. But it might have been long; for I knewssthere were demons who took note of my swoon, and who could havessarrested the vibration at pleasure. Upon my recovery, too, I feltssvery—oh! inexpressibly—sick and weak, as if through longssinanition. Even amid the agonies of that period, the human naturesscraved food. With painful effort I outstretched my left arm asssfar as my bonds permitted, and took possession of the smallssremnant which had been spared me by the rats. As I put a portionssof it within my lips, there rushed to my mind a half formedssthought of joy—of hope. Yet what business had _I_ with hope? Itsswas, as I say, a half formed thought—man has many such, which aressnever completed. I felt that it was of joy—of hope; but felt alsossthat it had perished in its formation. In vain I struggled tossperfect—to regain it. Long suffering had nearly annihilated allssmy ordinary powers of mind. I was an imbecile—an idiot.ssThe vibration of the pendulum was at right angles to my length. Isssaw that the crescent was designed to cross the region of thessheart. It would fray the serge of my robe—it would return andssrepeat its operations—again—and again. Notwithstanding itsssterrifically wide sweep (some thirty feet or more) and thesshissing vigor of its descent, sufficient to sunder these verysswalls of iron, still the fraying of my robe would be all that,ssfor several minutes, it would accomplish. And at this thought Isspaused. I dared not go farther than this reflection. I dwelt uponssit with a pertinacity of attention—as if, in so dwelling, I couldssarrest here the descent of the steel. I forced myself to ponderssupon the sound of the crescent as it should pass across thessgarment—upon the peculiar thrilling sensation which the frictionssof cloth produces on the nerves. I pondered upon all thisssfrivolity until my teeth were on edge.ssDown—steadily down it crept. I took a frenzied pleasure insscontrasting its downward with its lateral velocity. To thessright—to the left—far and wide—with the shriek of a damnedssspirit! to my heart with the stealthy pace of the tiger! Issalternately laughed and howled as the one or the other idea grewsspredominant.ssDown—certainly, relentlessly down! It vibrated within threessinches of my bosom! I struggled violently, furiously, to free myssleft arm. This was free only from the elbow to the hand. I couldssreach the latter, from the platter beside me, to my mouth, withssgreat effort, but no farther. Could I have broken the fasteningsssabove the elbow, I would have seized and attempted to arrest thesspendulum. I might as well have attempted to arrest an avalanche!ssDown—still unceasingly—still inevitably down! I gasped andssstruggled at each vibration. I shrunk convulsively at its everysssweep. My eyes followed its outward or upward whirls with thesseagerness of the most unmeaning despair; they closed themselvesssspasmodically at the descent, although death would have been assrelief, oh, how unspeakable! Still I quivered in every nerve tossthink how slight a sinking of the machinery would precipitatessthat keen, glistening axe upon my bosom. It was hope thatssprompted the nerve to quiver—the frame to shrink. It was hope—thesshope that triumphs on the rack—that whispers to thessdeath-condemned even in the dungeons of the Inquisition.ssI saw that some ten or twelve vibrations would bring the steel inssactual contact with my robe, and with this observation theresssuddenly came over my spirit all the keen, collected calmness ofssdespair. For the first time during many hours—or perhaps days—Issthought. It now occurred to me that the bandage, or surcingle,sswhich enveloped me, was unique. I was tied by no separate cord.ssThe first stroke of the razorlike crescent athwart any portion ofssthe band, would so detach it that it might be unwound from myssperson by means of my left hand. But how fearful, in that case,ssthe proximity of the steel! The result of the slightest strugglesshow deadly! Was it likely, moreover, that the minions of thesstorturer had not foreseen and provided for this possibility? Wasssit probable that the bandage crossed my bosom in the track of thesspendulum? Dreading to find my faint, and, as it seemed, my lastsshope frustrated, I so far elevated my head as to obtain assdistinct view of my breast. The surcingle enveloped my limbs andssbody close in all directions—save in the path of the destroyingsscrescent.ssScarcely had I dropped my head back into its original position,sswhen there flashed upon my mind what I cannot better describessthan as the unformed half of that idea of deliverance to which Isshave previously alluded, and of which a moiety only floatedssindeterminately through my brain when I raised food to my burningsslips. The whole thought was now present—feeble, scarcely sane,ssscarcely definite,—but still entire. I proceeded at once, withssthe nervous energy of despair, to attempt its execution.ssFor many hours the immediate vicinity of the low framework uponsswhich I lay had been literally swarming with rats. They weresswild, bold, ravenous—their red eyes glaring upon me as if theysswaited but for motionlessness on my part to make me their prey.ss“To what food,” I thought, “have they been accustomed in thesswell?”ssThey had devoured, in spite of all my efforts to prevent them,ssall but a small remnant of the contents of the dish. I had fallenssinto an habitual see-saw, or wave of the hand about the platter;ssand, at length, the unconscious uniformity of the movementssdeprived it of effect. In their voracity the vermin frequentlyssfastened their sharp fangs in my fingers. With the particles ofssthe oily and spicy viand which now remained, I thoroughly rubbedssthe bandage wherever I could reach it; then, raising my hand fromssthe floor, I lay breathlessly still.ssAt first the ravenous animals were startled and terrified at thesschange—at the cessation of movement. They shrank alarmedly back;ssmany sought the well. But this was only for a moment. I had notsscounted in vain upon their voracity. Observing that I remainedsswithout motion, one or two of the boldest leaped upon thessframe-work, and smelt at the surcingle. This seemed the signalssfor a general rush. Forth from the well they hurried in freshsstroops. They clung to the wood—they overran it, and leaped insshundreds upon my person. The measured movement of the pendulumssdisturbed them not at all. Avoiding its strokes they busiedssthemselves with the anointed bandage. They pressed—they swarmedssupon me in ever accumulating heaps. They writhed upon my throat;sstheir cold lips sought my own; I was half stifled by theirssthronging pressure; disgust, for which the world has no name,ssswelled my bosom, and chilled, with a heavy clamminess, my heart.ssYet one minute, and I felt that the struggle would be over.ssPlainly I perceived the loosening of the bandage. I knew that inssmore than one place it must be already severed. With a more thansshuman resolution I lay still.ssNor had I erred in my calculations—nor had I endured in vain. Issat length felt that I was free. The surcingle hung in ribandsssfrom my body. But the stroke of the pendulum already pressed uponssmy bosom. It had divided the serge of the robe. It had cutssthrough the linen beneath. Twice again it swung, and a sharpsssense of pain shot through every nerve. But the moment of escapesshad arrived. At a wave of my hand my deliverers hurriedsstumultuously away. With a steady movement—cautious, sidelong,ssshrinking, and slow—I slid from the embrace of the bandage andssbeyond the reach of the scimitar. For the moment, at least, I wasssfree.ssFree!—and in the grasp of the Inquisition! I had scarcely steppedssfrom my wooden bed of horror upon the stone floor of the prison,sswhen the motion of the hellish machine ceased and I beheld itssdrawn up, by some invisible force, through the ceiling. This wasssa lesson which I took desperately to heart. My every motion wasssundoubtedly watched. Free!—I had but escaped death in one form ofssagony, to be delivered unto worse than death in some other. Withssthat thought I rolled my eves nervously around on the barriers ofssiron that hemmed me in. Something unusual—some change which, atssfirst, I could not appreciate distinctly—it was obvious, hadsstaken place in the apartment. For many minutes of a dreamy andsstrembling abstraction, I busied myself in vain, unconnectedssconjecture. During this period, I became aware, for the firstsstime, of the origin of the sulphurous light which illumined thesscell. It proceeded from a fissure, about half an inch in width,ssextending entirely around the prison at the base of the walls,sswhich thus appeared, and were, completely separated from thessfloor. I endeavored, but of course in vain, to look through thessaperture.ssAs I arose from the attempt, the mystery of the alteration in thesschamber broke at once upon my understanding. I have observedssthat, although the outlines of the figures upon the walls weresssufficiently distinct, yet the colors seemed blurred andssindefinite. These colors had now assumed, and were momentarilyssassuming, a startling and most intense brilliancy, that gave tossthe spectral and fiendish portraitures an aspect that might havessthrilled even firmer nerves than my own. Demon eyes, of a wildssand ghastly vivacity, glared upon me in a thousand directions,sswhere none had been visible before, and gleamed with the luridsslustre of a fire that I could not force my imagination to regardssas unreal.ss_Unreal!_—Even while I breathed there came to my nostrils thessbreath of the vapour of heated iron! A suffocating odour pervadedssthe prison! A deeper glow settled each moment in the eyes thatssglared at my agonies! A richer tint of crimson diffused itselfssover the pictured horrors of blood. I panted! I gasped forssbreath! There could be no doubt of the design of mysstormentors—oh! most unrelenting! oh! most demoniac of men! Issshrank from the glowing metal to the centre of the cell. Amid thessthought of the fiery destruction that impended, the idea of thesscoolness of the well came over my soul like balm. I rushed to itsssdeadly brink. I threw my straining vision below. The glare fromssthe enkindled roof illumined its inmost recesses. Yet, for a wildssmoment, did my spirit refuse to comprehend the meaning of what Isssaw. At length it forced—it wrestled its way into my soul—itssburned itself in upon my shuddering reason. Oh! for a voice tossspeak!—oh! horror!—oh! any horror but this! With a shriek, Issrushed from the margin, and buried my face in my hands—weepingssbitterly.ssThe heat rapidly increased, and once again I looked up,ssshuddering as with a fit of the ague. There had been a secondsschange in the cell—and now the change was obviously in the form.ssAs before, it was in vain that I, at first, endeavoured tossappreciate or understand what was taking place. But not long wasssI left in doubt. The Inquisitorial vengeance had been hurried byssmy two-fold escape, and there was to be no more dallying with thessKing of Terrors. The room had been square. I saw that two of itsssiron angles were now acute—two, consequently, obtuse. The fearfulssdifference quickly increased with a low rumbling or moaningsssound. In an instant the apartment had shifted its form into thatssof a lozenge. But the alteration stopped not here—I neither hopedssnor desired it to stop. I could have clasped the red walls to myssbosom as a garment of eternal peace. “Death,” I said, “any deathssbut that of the pit!” Fool! might I have not known that into thesspit it was the object of the burning iron to urge me? Could Issresist its glow? or, if even that, could I withstand itssspressure? And now, flatter and flatter grew the lozenge, with assrapidity that left me no time for contemplation. Its centre, andssof course, its greatest width, came just over the yawning gulf. Issshrank back—but the closing walls pressed me resistlessly onward.ssAt length for my seared and writhing body there was no longer anssinch of foothold on the firm floor of the prison. I struggled nossmore, but the agony of my soul found vent in one loud, long, andssfinal scream of despair. I felt that I tottered upon the brink—Issaverted my eyes—ssThere was a discordant hum of human voices! There was a loudssblast as of many trumpets! There was a harsh grating as of assthousand thunders! The fiery walls rushed back! An outstretchedssarm caught my own as I fell, fainting, into the abyss. It wasssthat of General Lasalle. The French army had entered Toledo. ThessInquisition was in the hands of its enemies.ssTHE PREMATURE BURIALssThere are certain themes of which the interest is all-absorbing,ssbut which are too entirely horrible for the purposes ofsslegitimate fiction. These the mere romanticist must eschew, if hessdo not wish to offend or to disgust. They are with proprietysshandled only when the severity and majesty of Truth sanctify andsssustain them. We thrill, for example, with the most intense ofss“pleasurable pain” over the accounts of the Passage of thessBeresina, of the Earthquake at Lisbon, of the Plague at London,ssof the Massacre of St. Bartholomew, or of the stifling of thesshundred and twenty-three prisoners in the Black Hole at Calcutta.ssBut in these accounts it is the fact——it is the reality——it isssthe history which excites. As inventions, we should regard themsswith simple abhorrence.ssI have mentioned some few of the more prominent and augustsscalamities on record; but in these it is the extent, not lessssthan the character of the calamity, which so vividly impressesssthe fancy. I need not remind the reader that, from the long andssweird catalogue of human miseries, I might have selected manyssindividual instances more replete with essential suffering thanssany of these vast generalities of disaster. The truesswretchedness, indeed—the ultimate woe——is particular, notssdiffuse. That the ghastly extremes of agony are endured by manssthe unit, and never by man the mass——for this let us thank assmerciful God!ssTo be buried while alive is, beyond question, the most terrificssof these extremes which has ever fallen to the lot of meressmortality. That it has frequently, very frequently, so fallensswill scarcely be denied by those who think. The boundaries whichssdivide Life from Death are at best shadowy and vague. Who shallsssay where the one ends, and where the other begins? We know thatssthere are diseases in which occur total cessations of all thessapparent functions of vitality, and yet in which these cessationsssare merely suspensions, properly so called. They are onlysstemporary pauses in the incomprehensible mechanism. A certainssperiod elapses, and some unseen mysterious principle again setsssin motion the magic pinions and the wizard wheels. The silversscord was not for ever loosed, nor the golden bowl irreparablyssbroken. But where, meantime, was the soul?ssApart, however, from the inevitable conclusion, _a priori_ thatsssuch causes must produce such effects——that the well-knownssoccurrence of such cases of suspended animation must naturallyssgive rise, now and then, to premature interments—apart from thisssconsideration, we have the direct testimony of medical andssordinary experience to prove that a vast number of suchssinterments have actually taken place. I might refer at once, ifssnecessary, to a hundred well-authenticated instances. One of veryssremarkable character, and of which the circumstances may be freshssin the memory of some of my readers, occurred, not very long ago,ssin the neighboring city of Baltimore, where it occasioned asspainful, intense, and widely-extended excitement. The wife of onessof the most respectable citizens—a lawyer of eminence and assmember of Congress—was seized with a sudden and unaccountablessillness, which completely baffled the skill of her physicians.ssAfter much suffering she died, or was supposed to die. No onesssuspected, indeed, or had reason to suspect, that she was notssactually dead. She presented all the ordinary appearances ofssdeath. The face assumed the usual pinched and sunken outline. Thesslips were of the usual marble pallor. The eyes were lustreless.ssThere was no warmth. Pulsation had ceased. For three days thessbody was preserved unburied, during which it had acquired a stonyssrigidity. The funeral, in short, was hastened, on account of thessrapid advance of what was supposed to be decomposition.ssThe lady was deposited in her family vault, which, for threesssubsequent years, was undisturbed. At the expiration of this termssit was opened for the reception of a sarcophagus; but, alas! howssfearful a shock awaited the husband, who, personally, threw openssthe door! As its portals swung outwardly back, somesswhite-apparelled object fell rattling within his arms. It was thessskeleton of his wife in her yet unmoulded shroud.ssA careful investigation rendered it evident that she had revivedsswithin two days after her entombment; that her struggles withinssthe coffin had caused it to fall from a ledge, or shelf to thessfloor, where it was so broken as to permit her escape. A lampsswhich had been accidentally left, full of oil, within the tomb,sswas found empty; it might have been exhausted, however, byssevaporation. On the uttermost of the steps which led down intossthe dread chamber was a large fragment of the coffin, with which,ssit seemed, that she had endeavored to arrest attention byssstriking the iron door. While thus occupied, she probablyssswooned, or possibly died, through sheer terror; and, in failing,ssher shroud became entangled in some iron-work which projectedssinteriorly. Thus she remained, and thus she rotted, erect.ssIn the year 1810, a case of living inhumation happened in France,ssattended with circumstances which go far to warrant the assertionssthat truth is, indeed, stranger than fiction. The heroine of thessstory was a Mademoiselle Victorine Lafourcade, a young girl ofssillustrious family, of wealth, and of great personal beauty.ssAmong her numerous suitors was Julien Bossuet, a poorss_litterateur_, or journalist of Paris. His talents and generalssamiability had recommended him to the notice of the heiress, bysswhom he seems to have been truly beloved; but her pride of birthssdecided her, finally, to reject him, and to wed a MonsieurssRenelle, a banker and a diplomatist of some eminence. Afterssmarriage, however, this gentleman neglected, and, perhaps, evenssmore positively ill-treated her. Having passed with him somesswretched years, she died—at least her condition so closelyssresembled death as to deceive every one who saw her. She wasssburied——not in a vault, but in an ordinary grave in the villagessof her nativity. Filled with despair, and still inflamed by thessmemory of a profound attachment, the lover journeys from thesscapital to the remote province in which the village lies, withssthe romantic purpose of disinterring the corpse, and possessingsshimself of its luxuriant tresses. He reaches the grave. Atssmidnight he unearths the coffin, opens it, and is in the act ofssdetaching the hair, when he is arrested by the unclosing of thessbeloved eyes. In fact, the lady had been buried alive. Vitalitysshad not altogether departed, and she was aroused by the caressesssof her lover from the lethargy which had been mistaken for death.ssHe bore her frantically to his lodgings in the village. Hessemployed certain powerful restoratives suggested by no littlessmedical learning. In fine, she revived. She recognized hersspreserver. She remained with him until, by slow degrees, shessfully recovered her original health. Her woman’s heart was notssadamant, and this last lesson of love sufficed to soften it. Shessbestowed it upon Bossuet. She returned no more to her husband,ssbut, concealing from him her resurrection, fled with her lover tossAmerica. Twenty years afterward, the two returned to France, inssthe persuasion that time had so greatly altered the lady’sssappearance that her friends would be unable to recognize her.ssThey were mistaken, however, for, at the first meeting, MonsieurssRenelle did actually recognize and make claim to his wife. Thisssclaim she resisted, and a judicial tribunal sustained her in herssresistance, deciding that the peculiar circumstances, with thesslong lapse of years, had extinguished, not only equitably, butsslegally, the authority of the husband.ssThe “Chirurgical Journal” of Leipsic, a periodical of highssauthority and merit, which some American bookseller would do wellssto translate and republish, records in a late number a veryssdistressing event of the character in question.ssAn officer of artillery, a man of gigantic stature and of robustsshealth, being thrown from an unmanageable horse, received a verysssevere contusion upon the head, which rendered him insensible atssonce; the skull was slightly fractured, but no immediate dangersswas apprehended. Trepanning was accomplished successfully. He wasssbled, and many other of the ordinary means of relief weressadopted. Gradually, however, he fell into a more and moresshopeless state of stupor, and, finally, it was thought that hessdied.ssThe weather was warm, and he was buried with indecent haste inssone of the public cemeteries. His funeral took place on Thursday.ssOn the Sunday following, the grounds of the cemetery were, asssusual, much thronged with visitors, and about noon an intensessexcitement was created by the declaration of a peasant that,sswhile sitting upon the grave of the officer, he had distinctlyssfelt a commotion of the earth, as if occasioned by some onessstruggling beneath. At first little attention was paid to thessman’s asseveration; but his evident terror, and the doggedssobstinacy with which he persisted in his story, had at lengthsstheir natural effect upon the crowd. Spades were hurriedlyssprocured, and the grave, which was shamefully shallow, was in assfew minutes so far thrown open that the head of its occupantssappeared. He was then seemingly dead; but he sat nearly erectsswithin his coffin, the lid of which, in his furious struggles, hesshad partially uplifted.ssHe was forthwith conveyed to the nearest hospital, and theresspronounced to be still living, although in an asphytic condition.ssAfter some hours he revived, recognized individuals of hisssacquaintance, and, in broken sentences spoke of his agonies inssthe grave.ssFrom what he related, it was clear that he must have beenssconscious of life for more than an hour, while inhumed, beforesslapsing into insensibility. The grave was carelessly and looselyssfilled with an exceedingly porous soil; and thus some air wasssnecessarily admitted. He heard the footsteps of the crowdssoverhead, and endeavored to make himself heard in turn. It wasssthe tumult within the grounds of the cemetery, he said, whichssappeared to awaken him from a deep sleep, but no sooner was hessawake than he became fully aware of the awful horrors of hisssposition.ssThis patient, it is recorded, was doing well and seemed to be inssa fair way of ultimate recovery, but fell a victim to thessquackeries of medical experiment. The galvanic battery wasssapplied, and he suddenly expired in one of those ecstaticssparoxysms which, occasionally, it superinduces.ssThe mention of the galvanic battery, nevertheless, recalls to myssmemory a well known and very extraordinary case in point, wheressits action proved the means of restoring to animation a youngssattorney of London, who had been interred for two days. Thisssoccurred in 1831, and created, at the time, a very profoundsssensation wherever it was made the subject of converse.ssThe patient, Mr. Edward Stapleton, had died, apparently of typhusssfever, accompanied with some anomalous symptoms which had excitedssthe curiosity of his medical attendants. Upon his seemingssdecease, his friends were requested to sanction a post-mortemssexamination, but declined to permit it. As often happens, whensssuch refusals are made, the practitioners resolved to disinterssthe body and dissect it at leisure, in private. Arrangements weresseasily effected with some of the numerous corps ofssbody-snatchers, with which London abounds; and, upon the thirdssnight after the funeral, the supposed corpse was unearthed from assgrave eight feet deep, and deposited in the opening chamber ofssone of the private hospitals.ssAn incision of some extent had been actually made in the abdomen,sswhen the fresh and undecayed appearance of the subject suggestedssan application of the battery. One experiment succeeded another,ssand the customary effects supervened, with nothing tosscharacterize them in any respect, except, upon one or twossoccasions, a more than ordinary degree of life-likeness in thessconvulsive action.ssIt grew late. The day was about to dawn; and it was thoughtssexpedient, at length, to proceed at once to the dissection. Assstudent, however, was especially desirous of testing a theory ofsshis own, and insisted upon applying the battery to one of thesspectoral muscles. A rough gash was made, and a wire hastilyssbrought in contact, when the patient, with a hurried but quitessunconvulsive movement, arose from the table, stepped into thessmiddle of the floor, gazed about him uneasily for a few seconds,ssand then—spoke. What he said was unintelligible, but words weressuttered; the syllabification was distinct. Having spoken, he fellssheavily to the floor.ssFor some moments all were paralyzed with awe—but the urgency ofssthe case soon restored them their presence of mind. It was seenssthat Mr. Stapleton was alive, although in a swoon. Uponssexhibition of ether he revived and was rapidly restored tosshealth, and to the society of his friends—from whom, however, allssknowledge of his resuscitation was withheld, until a relapse wasssno longer to be apprehended. Their wonder—their rapturousssastonishment—may be conceived.ssThe most thrilling peculiarity of this incident, nevertheless, isssinvolved in what Mr. S. himself asserts. He declares that at nossperiod was he altogether insensible—that, dully and confusedly,sshe was aware of everything which happened to him, from the momentssin which he was pronounced dead by his physicians, to that insswhich he fell swooning to the floor of the hospital. “I amssalive,” were the uncomprehended words which, upon recognizing thesslocality of the dissecting-room, he had endeavored, in hisssextremity, to utter.ssIt were an easy matter to multiply such histories as these—but Issforbear—for, indeed, we have no need of such to establish thessfact that premature interments occur. When we reflect how veryssrarely, from the nature of the case, we have it in our power tossdetect them, we must admit that they may frequently occur withoutssour cognizance. Scarcely, in truth, is a graveyard everssencroached upon, for any purpose, to any great extent, thatssskeletons are not found in postures which suggest the mostssfearful of suspicions.ssFearful indeed the suspicion—but more fearful the doom! It may bessasserted, without hesitation, that no event is so terribly wellssadapted to inspire the supremeness of bodily and of mentalssdistress, as is burial before death. The unendurable oppressionssof the lungs—the stifling fumes from the damp earth—the clingingssto the death garments—the rigid embrace of the narrow house—thessblackness of the absolute Night—the silence like a sea thatssoverwhelms—the unseen but palpable presence of the ConquerorssWorm—these things, with the thoughts of the air and grass above,sswith memory of dear friends who would fly to save us if butssinformed of our fate, and with consciousness that of this fatessthey can never be informed—that our hopeless portion is that ofssthe really dead—these considerations, I say, carry into thessheart, which still palpitates, a degree of appalling andssintolerable horror from which the most daring imagination mustssrecoil. We know of nothing so agonizing upon Earth—we can dreamssof nothing half so hideous in the realms of the nethermost Hell.ssAnd thus all narratives upon this topic have an interestssprofound; an interest, nevertheless, which, through the sacredssawe of the topic itself, very properly and very peculiarlyssdepends upon our conviction of the truth of the matter narrated.ssWhat I have now to tell is of my own actual knowledge—of my ownsspositive and personal experience.ssFor several years I had been subject to attacks of the singularssdisorder which physicians have agreed to term catalepsy, inssdefault of a more definitive title. Although both the immediatessand the predisposing causes, and even the actual diagnosis, ofssthis disease are still mysterious, its obvious and apparentsscharacter is sufficiently well understood. Its variations seem tossbe chiefly of degree. Sometimes the patient lies, for a day only,ssor even for a shorter period, in a species of exaggeratedsslethargy. He is senseless and externally motionless; but thesspulsation of the heart is still faintly perceptible; some tracesssof warmth remain; a slight color lingers within the centre of thesscheek; and, upon application of a mirror to the lips, we canssdetect a torpid, unequal, and vacillating action of the lungs.ssThen again the duration of the trance is for weeks—even forssmonths; while the closest scrutiny, and the most rigorous medicalsstests, fail to establish any material distinction between thessstate of the sufferer and what we conceive of absolute death.ssVery usually he is saved from premature interment solely by thessknowledge of his friends that he has been previously subject tosscatalepsy, by the consequent suspicion excited, and, above all,ssby the non-appearance of decay. The advances of the malady are,ssluckily, gradual. The first manifestations, although marked, aressunequivocal. The fits grow successively more and moressdistinctive, and endure each for a longer term than thesspreceding. In this lies the principal security from inhumation.ssThe unfortunate whose first attack should be of the extremesscharacter which is occasionally seen, would almost inevitably bessconsigned alive to the tomb.ssMy own case differed in no important particular from thosessmentioned in medical books. Sometimes, without any apparentsscause, I sank, little by little, into a condition ofsssemi-syncope, or half swoon; and, in this condition, withoutsspain, without ability to stir, or, strictly speaking, to think,ssbut with a dull lethargic consciousness of life and of thesspresence of those who surrounded my bed, I remained, until thesscrisis of the disease restored me, suddenly, to perfectsssensation. At other times I was quickly and impetuously smitten.ssI grew sick, and numb, and chilly, and dizzy, and so fellssprostrate at once. Then, for weeks, all was void, and black, andsssilent, and Nothing became the universe. Total annihilation couldssbe no more. From these latter attacks I awoke, however, with assgradation slow in proportion to the suddenness of the seizure.ssJust as the day dawns to the friendless and houseless beggar whossroams the streets throughout the long desolate winter night—justssso tardily—just so wearily—just so cheerily came back the lightssof the Soul to me.ssApart from the tendency to trance, however, my general healthssappeared to be good; nor could I perceive that it was at allssaffected by the one prevalent malady—unless, indeed, anssidiosyncrasy in my ordinary sleep may be looked upon assssuperinduced. Upon awaking from slumber, I could never gain, atssonce, thorough possession of my senses, and always remained, forssmany minutes, in much bewilderment and perplexity—the mentalssfaculties in general, but the memory in especial, being in asscondition of absolute abeyance.ssIn all that I endured there was no physical suffering but ofssmoral distress an infinitude. My fancy grew charnel, I talked “ofssworms, of tombs, and epitaphs.” I was lost in reveries of death,ssand the idea of premature burial held continual possession of myssbrain. The ghastly Danger to which I was subjected haunted me dayssand night. In the former, the torture of meditation wasssexcessive—in the latter, supreme. When the grim Darknessssoverspread the Earth, then, with every horror of thought, Issshook—shook as the quivering plumes upon the hearse. When Naturesscould endure wakefulness no longer, it was with a struggle that Issconsented to sleep—for I shuddered to reflect that, upon awaking,ssI might find myself the tenant of a grave. And when, finally, Isssank into slumber, it was only to rush at once into a world ofssphantasms, above which, with vast, sable, overshadowing wing,sshovered, predominant, the one sepulchral Idea.ssFrom the innumerable images of gloom which thus oppressed me inssdreams, I select for record but a solitary vision. Methought Isswas immersed in a cataleptic trance of more than usual durationssand profundity. Suddenly there came an icy hand upon my forehead,ssand an impatient, gibbering voice whispered the word “Arise!”sswithin my ear.ssI sat erect. The darkness was total. I could not see the figuressof him who had aroused me. I could call to mind neither thessperiod at which I had fallen into the trance, nor the locality insswhich I then lay. While I remained motionless, and busied inssendeavors to collect my thought, the cold hand grasped messfiercely by the wrist, shaking it petulantly, while the gibberingssvoice said again:ss“Arise! did I not bid thee arise?”ss“And who,” I demanded, “art thou?”ss“I have no name in the regions which I inhabit,” replied thessvoice, mournfully; “I was mortal, but am fiend. I was merciless,ssbut am pitiful. Thou dost feel that I shudder. My teeth chatterssas I speak, yet it is not with the chilliness of the night—of thessnight without end. But this hideousness is insufferable. Howsscanst thou tranquilly sleep? I cannot rest for the cry of thesessgreat agonies. These sights are more than I can bear. Get theessup! Come with me into the outer Night, and let me unfold to theessthe graves. Is not this a spectacle of woe?—Behold!”ssI looked; and the unseen figure, which still grasped me by thesswrist, had caused to be thrown open the graves of all mankind;ssand from each issued the faint phosphoric radiance of decay; sossthat I could see into the innermost recesses, and there view thessshrouded bodies in their sad and solemn slumbers with the worm.ssBut alas! the real sleepers were fewer, by many millions, thanssthose who slumbered not at all; and there was a feeblessstruggling; and there was a general sad unrest; and from out thessdepths of the countless pits there came a melancholy rustlingssfrom the garments of the buried. And of those who seemedsstranquilly to repose, I saw that a vast number had changed, in assgreater or less degree, the rigid and uneasy position in whichssthey had originally been entombed. And the voice again said to messas I gazed:ss“Is it not—oh! is it _not_ a pitiful sight?” But, before I couldssfind words to reply, the figure had ceased to grasp my wrist, thessphosphoric lights expired, and the graves were closed with asssudden violence, while from out them arose a tumult of despairingsscries, saying again: “Is it not—O, God, is it _not_ a verysspitiful sight?”ssPhantasies such as these, presenting themselves at night,ssextended their terrific influence far into my waking hours. Myssnerves became thoroughly unstrung, and I fell a prey to perpetualsshorror. I hesitated to ride, or to walk, or to indulge in anyssexercise that would carry me from home. In fact, I no longerssdared trust myself out of the immediate presence of those whosswere aware of my proneness to catalepsy, lest, falling into onessof my usual fits, I should be buried before my real conditionsscould be ascertained. I doubted the care, the fidelity of myssdearest friends. I dreaded that, in some trance of more thansscustomary duration, they might be prevailed upon to regard me asssirrecoverable. I even went so far as to fear that, as Issoccasioned much trouble, they might be glad to consider any veryssprotracted attack as sufficient excuse for getting rid of messaltogether. It was in vain they endeavored to reassure me by thessmost solemn promises. I exacted the most sacred oaths, that underssno circumstances they would bury me until decomposition had sossmaterially advanced as to render farther preservation impossible.ssAnd, even then, my mortal terrors would listen to no reason—wouldssaccept no consolation. I entered into a series of elaboratessprecautions. Among other things, I had the family vault sossremodelled as to admit of being readily opened from within. Thessslightest pressure upon a long lever that extended far into thesstomb would cause the iron portal to fly back. There weressarrangements also for the free admission of air and light, andssconvenient receptacles for food and water, within immediate reachssof the coffin intended for my reception. This coffin was warmlyssand softly padded, and was provided with a lid, fashioned uponssthe principle of the vault-door, with the addition of springs sosscontrived that the feeblest movement of the body would besssufficient to set it at liberty. Besides all this, there wassssuspended from the roof of the tomb, a large bell, the rope ofsswhich, it was designed, should extend through a hole in thesscoffin, and so be fastened to one of the hands of the corpse.ssBut, alas? what avails the vigilance against the Destiny of man?ssNot even these well-contrived securities sufficed to save fromssthe uttermost agonies of living inhumation, a wretch to thesessagonies foredoomed!ssThere arrived an epoch—as often before there had arrived—in whichssI found myself emerging from total unconsciousness into the firstssfeeble and indefinite sense of existence. Slowly—with a tortoisessgradation—approached the faint gray dawn of the psychal day. Asstorpid uneasiness. An apathetic endurance of dull pain. Nosscare—no hope—no effort. Then, after a long interval, a ringing inssthe ears; then, after a lapse still longer, a prickling orsstingling sensation in the extremities; then a seemingly eternalssperiod of pleasurable quiescence, during which the awakeningssfeelings are struggling into thought; then a brief re-sinkingssinto non-entity; then a sudden recovery. At length the slightssquivering of an eyelid, and immediately thereupon, an electricssshock of a terror, deadly and indefinite, which sends the bloodssin torrents from the temples to the heart. And now the firstsspositive effort to think. And now the first endeavor to remember.ssAnd now a partial and evanescent success. And now the memory hasssso far regained its dominion, that, in some measure, I amsscognizant of my state. I feel that I am not awaking from ordinarysssleep. I recollect that I have been subject to catalepsy. Andssnow, at last, as if by the rush of an ocean, my shuddering spiritssis overwhelmed by the one grim Danger—by the one spectral andssever-prevalent idea.ssFor some minutes after this fancy possessed me, I remainedsswithout motion. And why? I could not summon courage to move. Issdared not make the effort which was to satisfy me of my fate—andssyet there was something at my heart which whispered me it wassssure. Despair—such as no other species of wretchedness ever callsssinto being—despair alone urged me, after long irresolution, tossuplift the heavy lids of my eyes. I uplifted them. It wasssdark—all dark. I knew that the fit was over. I knew that thesscrisis of my disorder had long passed. I knew that I had nowssfully recovered the use of my visual faculties—and yet it wasssdark—all dark—the intense and utter raylessness of the Night thatssendureth for evermore.ssI endeavored to shriek; and my lips and my parched tongue movedssconvulsively together in the attempt—but no voice issued from thesscavernous lungs, which oppressed as if by the weight of somessincumbent mountain, gasped and palpitated, with the heart, atssevery elaborate and struggling inspiration.ssThe movement of the jaws, in this effort to cry aloud, showed messthat they were bound up, as is usual with the dead. I felt, too,ssthat I lay upon some hard substance; and by something similar mysssides were, also, closely compressed. So far, I had not venturedssto stir any of my limbs—but now I violently threw up my arms,sswhich had been lying at length, with the wrists crossed. Theyssstruck a solid wooden substance, which extended above my personssat an elevation of not more than six inches from my face. I couldssno longer doubt that I reposed within a coffin at last.ssAnd now, amid all my infinite miseries, came sweetly the cherubssHope—for I thought of my precautions. I writhed, and madessspasmodic exertions to force open the lid: it would not move. Issfelt my wrists for the bell-rope: it was not to be found. And nowssthe Comforter fled for ever, and a still sterner Despair reignedsstriumphant; for I could not help perceiving the absence of thesspaddings which I had so carefully prepared—and then, too, theresscame suddenly to my nostrils the strong peculiar odor of moistssearth. The conclusion was irresistible. I was not within thessvault. I had fallen into a trance while absent from home—whilessamong strangers—when, or how, I could not remember—and it wasssthey who had buried me as a dog—nailed up in some commonsscoffin—and thrust deep, deep, and for ever, into some ordinaryssand nameless grave.ssAs this awful conviction forced itself, thus, into the innermostsschambers of my soul, I once again struggled to cry aloud. And inssthis second endeavor I succeeded. A long, wild, and continuousssshriek, or yell of agony, resounded through the realms of thesssubterranean Night.ss“Hillo! hillo, there!” said a gruff voice, in reply.ss“What the devil’s the matter now!” said a second.ss“Get out o’ that!” said a third.ss“What do you mean by yowling in that ere kind of style, like asscattymount?” said a fourth; and hereupon I was seized and shakensswithout ceremony, for several minutes, by a junto of veryssrough-looking individuals. They did not arouse me from myssslumber—for I was wide awake when I screamed—but they restored messto the full possession of my memory.ssThis adventure occurred near Richmond, in Virginia. Accompaniedssby a friend, I had proceeded, upon a gunning expedition, somessmiles down the banks of the James River. Night approached, and wesswere overtaken by a storm. The cabin of a small sloop lying atssanchor in the stream, and laden with garden mould, afforded usssthe only available shelter. We made the best of it, and passedssthe night on board. I slept in one of the only two berths in thessvessel—and the berths of a sloop of sixty or twenty tons needssscarcely be described. That which I occupied had no bedding ofssany kind. Its extreme width was eighteen inches. The distance ofssits bottom from the deck overhead was precisely the same. I foundssit a matter of exceeding difficulty to squeeze myself in.ssNevertheless, I slept soundly, and the whole of my vision—for itsswas no dream, and no nightmare—arose naturally from thesscircumstances of my position—from my ordinary bias of thought—andssfrom the difficulty, to which I have alluded, of collecting mysssenses, and especially of regaining my memory, for a long timessafter awaking from slumber. The men who shook me were the crew ofssthe sloop, and some laborers engaged to unload it. From the loadssitself came the earthly smell. The bandage about the jaws was asssilk handkerchief in which I had bound up my head, in default ofssmy customary nightcap.ssThe tortures endured, however, were indubitably quite equal forssthe time, to those of actual sepulture. They were fearfully—theysswere inconceivably hideous; but out of Evil proceeded Good; forsstheir very excess wrought in my spirit an inevitable revulsion.ssMy soul acquired tone—acquired temper. I went abroad. I tookssvigorous exercise. I breathed the free air of Heaven. I thoughtssupon other subjects than Death. I discarded my medical books.ss“Buchan” I burned. I read no “Night Thoughts”—no fustian aboutsschurchyards—no bugaboo tales—such as this. In short, I became assnew man, and lived a man’s life. From that memorable night, Issdismissed forever my charnel apprehensions, and with themssvanished the cataleptic disorder, of which, perhaps, they hadssbeen less the consequence than the cause.ssThere are moments when, even to the sober eye of Reason, thessworld of our sad Humanity may assume the semblance of a Hell—butssthe imagination of man is no Carathis, to explore with impunityssits every cavern. Alas! the grim legion of sepulchral terrorssscannot be regarded as altogether fanciful—but, like the Demons insswhose company Afrasiab made his voyage down the Oxus, they mustsssleep, or they will devour us—they must be suffered to slumber,ssor we perish.ssTHE DOMAIN OF ARNHEIMssThe garden like a lady fair was cut,ssThat lay as if she slumbered in delight,
And to the open skies her eyes did shut.ssThe azure fields of Heaven were ’sembled rightssIn a large round, set with the flowers of light.
The flowers de luce, and the round sparks of dew
That hung upon their azure leaves did shew
Like twinkling stars that sparkle in the evening blue.ss—_Giles Fletcher_.ssFrom his cradle to his grave a gale of prosperity bore my friendssEllison along. Nor do I use the word prosperity in its meressworldly sense. I mean it as synonymous with happiness. The personssof whom I speak seemed born for the purpose of foreshadowing thessdoctrines of Turgot, Price, Priestley, and Condorcet—ofssexemplifying by individual instance what has been deemed thesschimera of the perfectionists. In the brief existence of EllisonssI fancy that I have seen refuted the dogma, that in man’s veryssnature lies some hidden principle, the antagonist of bliss. Anssanxious examination of his career has given me to understand thatssin general, from the violation of a few simple laws of humanityssarises the wretchedness of mankind—that as a species we have inssour possession the as yet unwrought elements of content—and that,sseven now, in the present darkness and madness of all thought onssthe great question of the social condition, it is not impossiblessthat man, the individual, under certain unusual and highlyssfortuitous conditions, may be happy.ssWith opinions such as these my young friend, too, was fullyssimbued, and thus it is worthy of observation that thessuninterrupted enjoyment which distinguished his life was, inssgreat measure, the result of preconcert. It is indeed evidentssthat with less of the instinctive philosophy which, now and then,ssstands so well in the stead of experience, Mr. Ellison would havessfound himself precipitated, by the very extraordinary success ofsshis life, into the common vortex of unhappiness which yawns forssthose of pre-eminent endowments. But it is by no means my objectssto pen an essay on happiness. The ideas of my friend may besssummed up in a few words. He admitted but four elementaryssprinciples, or more strictly, conditions of bliss. That which hessconsidered chief was (strange to say!) the simple and purelyssphysical one of free exercise in the open air. “The health,” hesssaid, “attainable by other means is scarcely worth the name.” Hessinstanced the ecstasies of the fox-hunter, and pointed to thesstillers of the earth, the only people who, as a class, can bessfairly considered happier than others. His second condition wasssthe love of woman. His third, and most difficult of realization,sswas the contempt of ambition. His fourth was an object ofssunceasing pursuit; and he held that, other things being equal,ssthe extent of attainable happiness was in proportion to thessspirituality of this object.ssEllison was remarkable in the continuous profusion of good giftssslavished upon him by fortune. In personal grace and beauty hessexceeded all men. His intellect was of that order to which thessacquisition of knowledge is less a labor than an intuition and assnecessity. His family was one of the most illustrious of thessempire. His bride was the loveliest and most devoted of women.ssHis possessions had been always ample; but on the attainment ofsshis majority, it was discovered that one of those extraordinaryssfreaks of fate had been played in his behalf which startle thesswhole social world amid which they occur, and seldom failssradically to alter the moral constitution of those who are theirssobjects.ssIt appears that about a hundred years before Mr. Ellison’s comingssof age, there had died, in a remote province, one Mr. SeabrightssEllison. This gentleman had amassed a princely fortune, and,sshaving no immediate connections, conceived the whim of sufferingsshis wealth to accumulate for a century after his decease.ssMinutely and sagaciously directing the various modes ofssinvestment, he bequeathed the aggregate amount to the nearest ofssblood, bearing the name of Ellison, who should be alive at thessend of the hundred years. Many attempts had been made to setssaside this singular bequest; their ex post facto characterssrendered them abortive; but the attention of a jealous governmentsswas aroused, and a legislative act finally obtained, forbiddingssall similar accumulations. This act, however, did not preventssyoung Ellison from entering into possession, on his twenty-firstssbirthday, as the heir of his ancestor Seabright, of a fortune ofssfour hundred and fifty millions of dollars. (*1)ssWhen it had become known that such was the enormous wealthssinherited, there were, of course, many speculations as to thessmode of its disposal. The magnitude and the immediatessavailability of the sum bewildered all who thought on the topic.ssThe possessor of any appreciable amount of money might have beenssimagined to perform any one of a thousand things. With richesssmerely surpassing those of any citizen, it would have been easyssto suppose him engaging to supreme excess in the fashionablessextravagances of his time—or busying himself with politicalssintrigue—or aiming at ministerial power—or purchasing increase ofssnobility—or collecting large museums of virtu—or playing thessmunificent patron of letters, of science, of art—or endowing, andssbestowing his name upon extensive institutions of charity. Butssfor the inconceivable wealth in the actual possession of thessheir, these objects and all ordinary objects were felt to affordsstoo limited a field. Recourse was had to figures, and these butsssufficed to confound. It was seen that, even at three per cent.,ssthe annual income of the inheritance amounted to no less thanssthirteen millions and five hundred thousand dollars; which wasssone million and one hundred and twenty-five thousand per month;ssor thirty-six thousand nine hundred and eighty-six per day; orssone thousand five hundred and forty-one per hour; or six andsstwenty dollars for every minute that flew. Thus the usual trackssof supposition was thoroughly broken up. Men knew not what tossimagine. There were some who even conceived that Mr. Ellisonsswould divest himself of at least one-half of his fortune, as ofssutterly superfluous opulence—enriching whole troops of hisssrelatives by division of his superabundance. To the nearest ofssthese he did, in fact, abandon the very unusual wealth which wassshis own before the inheritance.ssI was not surprised, however, to perceive that he had long madessup his mind on a point which had occasioned so much discussion tosshis friends. Nor was I greatly astonished at the nature of hisssdecision. In regard to individual charities he had satisfied hisssconscience. In the possibility of any improvement, properly sosscalled, being effected by man himself in the general condition ofssman, he had (I am sorry to confess it) little faith. Upon thesswhole, whether happily or unhappily, he was thrown back, in veryssgreat measure, upon self.ssIn the widest and noblest sense he was a poet. He comprehended,ssmoreover, the true character, the august aims, the supremessmajesty and dignity of the poetic sentiment. The fullest, if notssthe sole proper satisfaction of this sentiment he instinctivelyssfelt to lie in the creation of novel forms of beauty. Somesspeculiarities, either in his early education, or in the nature ofsshis intellect, had tinged with what is termed materialism all hisssethical speculations; and it was this bias, perhaps, which ledsshim to believe that the most advantageous at least, if not thesssole legitimate field for the poetic exercise, lies in thesscreation of novel moods of purely physical loveliness. Thus itsshappened he became neither musician nor poet—if we use thissslatter term in its every-day acceptation. Or it might have beenssthat he neglected to become either, merely in pursuance of hisssidea that in contempt of ambition is to be found one of thessessential principles of happiness on earth. Is it not indeed,sspossible that, while a high order of genius is necessarilyssambitious, the highest is above that which is termed ambition?ssAnd may it not thus happen that many far greater than Milton havesscontentedly remained “mute and inglorious?” I believe that thessworld has never seen—and that, unless through some series ofssaccidents goading the noblest order of mind into distastefulssexertion, the world will never see—that full extent of triumphantssexecution, in the richer domains of art, of which the humanssnature is absolutely capable.ssEllison became neither musician nor poet; although no man livedssmore profoundly enamored of music and poetry. Under othersscircumstances than those which invested him, it is not impossiblessthat he would have become a painter. Sculpture, although in itsssnature rigorously poetical was too limited in its extent andssconsequences, to have occupied, at any time, much of hisssattention. And I have now mentioned all the provinces in whichssthe common understanding of the poetic sentiment has declared itsscapable of expatiating. But Ellison maintained that the richest,ssthe truest, and most natural, if not altogether the mostssextensive province, had been unaccountably neglected. Nossdefinition had spoken of the landscape-gardener as of the poet;ssyet it seemed to my friend that the creation of thesslandscape-garden offered to the proper Muse the most magnificentssof opportunities. Here, indeed, was the fairest field for thessdisplay of imagination in the endless combining of forms of novelssbeauty; the elements to enter into combination being, by a vastsssuperiority, the most glorious which the earth could afford. Inssthe multiform and multicolor of the flowers and the trees, hessrecognised the most direct and energetic efforts of Nature atssphysical loveliness. And in the direction or concentration ofssthis effort—or, more properly, in its adaptation to the eyessswhich were to behold it on earth—he perceived that he should bessemploying the best means—laboring to the greatest advantage—inssthe fulfilment, not only of his own destiny as poet, but of thessaugust purposes for which the Deity had implanted the poeticsssentiment in man.ss“Its adaptation to the eyes which were to behold it on earth.” Insshis explanation of this phraseology, Mr. Ellison did much towardsssolving what has always seemed to me an enigma:—I mean the factss(which none but the ignorant dispute) that no such combination ofssscenery exists in nature as the painter of genius may produce. Nosssuch paradises are to be found in reality as have glowed on thesscanvas of Claude. In the most enchanting of natural landscapes,ssthere will always be found a defect or an excess—many excessesssand defects. While the component parts may defy, individually,ssthe highest skill of the artist, the arrangement of these partssswill always be susceptible of improvement. In short, no positionsscan be attained on the wide surface of the natural earth, fromsswhich an artistical eye, looking steadily, will not find matterssof offence in what is termed the “composition” of the landscape.ssAnd yet how unintelligible is this! In all other matters we aressjustly instructed to regard nature as supreme. With her detailssswe shrink from competition. Who shall presume to imitate thesscolors of the tulip, or to improve the proportions of the lily ofssthe valley? The criticism which says, of sculpture orssportraiture, that here nature is to be exalted or idealizedssrather than imitated, is in error. No pictorial or sculpturalsscombinations of points of human liveliness do more than approachssthe living and breathing beauty. In landscape alone is thessprinciple of the critic true; and, having felt its truth here, itssis but the headlong spirit of generalization which has led him tosspronounce it true throughout all the domains of art. Having, Isssay, felt its truth here; for the feeling is no affectation orsschimera. The mathematics afford no more absolute demonstrationsssthan the sentiments of his art yields the artist. He not onlyssbelieves, but positively knows, that such and such apparentlyssarbitrary arrangements of matter constitute and alone constitutessthe true beauty. His reasons, however, have not yet been maturedssinto expression. It remains for a more profound analysis than thessworld has yet seen, fully to investigate and express them.ssNevertheless he is confirmed in his instinctive opinions by thessvoice of all his brethren. Let a “composition” be defective; letssan emendation be wrought in its mere arrangement of form; letssthis emendation be submitted to every artist in the world; bysseach will its necessity be admitted. And even far more than this;ssin remedy of the defective composition, each insulated member ofssthe fraternity would have suggested the identical emendation.ssI repeat that in landscape arrangements alone is the physicalssnature susceptible of exaltation, and that, therefore, hersssusceptibility of improvement at this one point, was a mystery Isshad been unable to solve. My own thoughts on the subject hadssrested in the idea that the primitive intention of nature wouldsshave so arranged the earth’s surface as to have fulfilled at allsspoints man’s sense of perfection in the beautiful, the sublime,ssor the picturesque; but that this primitive intention had beenssfrustrated by the known geological disturbances—disturbances ofssform and color—grouping, in the correction or allaying of whichsslies the soul of art. The force of this idea was much weakened,sshowever, by the necessity which it involved of considering thessdisturbances abnormal and unadapted to any purpose. It wasssEllison who suggested that they were prognostic of death. He thusssexplained:—Admit the earthly immortality of man to have been thessfirst intention. We have then the primitive arrangement of thessearth’s surface adapted to his blissful estate, as not existentssbut designed. The disturbances were the preparations for hissssubsequently conceived deathful condition.ss“Now,” said my friend, “what we regard as exaltation of thesslandscape may be really such, as respects only the moral or humansspoint of view. Each alteration of the natural scenery maysspossibly effect a blemish in the picture, if we can suppose thissspicture viewed at large—in mass—from some point distant from thessearth’s surface, although not beyond the limits of itsssatmosphere. It is easily understood that what might improve assclosely scrutinized detail, may at the same time injure a generalssor more distantly observed effect. There may be a class ofssbeings, human once, but now invisible to humanity, to whom, fromssafar, our disorder may seem order—our unpicturesquenesssspicturesque; in a word, the earth-angels, for whose scrutiny moressespecially than our own, and for whose death-refined appreciationssof the beautiful, may have been set in array by God the widesslandscape-gardens of the hemispheres.”ssIn the course of discussion, my friend quoted some passages fromssa writer on landscape-gardening who has been supposed to havesswell treated his theme:ss“There are properly but two styles of landscape-gardening, thessnatural and the artificial. One seeks to recall the originalssbeauty of the country, by adapting its means to the surroundingssscenery, cultivating trees in harmony with the hills or plain ofssthe neighboring land; detecting and bringing into practice thosessnice relations of size, proportion, and color which, hid from thesscommon observer, are revealed everywhere to the experiencedssstudent of nature. The result of the natural style of gardening,ssis seen rather in the absence of all defects and incongruities—inssthe prevalence of a healthy harmony and order—than in thesscreation of any special wonders or miracles. The artificial stylesshas as many varieties as there are different tastes to gratify.ssIt has a certain general relation to the various styles ofssbuilding. There are the stately avenues and retirements ofssVersailles; Italian terraces; and a various mixed old Englishssstyle, which bears some relation to the domestic Gothic orssEnglish Elizabethan architecture. Whatever may be said againstssthe abuses of the artificial landscape-gardening, a mixture ofsspure art in a garden scene adds to it a great beauty. This issspartly pleasing to the eye, by the show of order and design, andsspartly moral. A terrace, with an old moss-covered balustrade,sscalls up at once to the eye the fair forms that have passed theressin other days. The slightest exhibition of art is an evidence ofsscare and human interest.”ss“From what I have already observed,” said Ellison, “you willssunderstand that I reject the idea, here expressed, of recallingssthe original beauty of the country. The original beauty is neverssso great as that which may be introduced. Of course, every thingssdepends on the selection of a spot with capabilities. What issssaid about detecting and bringing into practice nice relations ofsssize, proportion, and color, is one of those mere vaguenesses ofssspeech which serve to veil inaccuracy of thought. The phrasessquoted may mean any thing, or nothing, and guides in no degree.ssThat the true result of the natural style of gardening is seenssrather in the absence of all defects and incongruities than inssthe creation of any special wonders or miracles, is a propositionssbetter suited to the grovelling apprehension of the herd than tossthe fervid dreams of the man of genius. The negative meritsssuggested appertains to that hobbling criticism which, inssletters, would elevate Addison into apotheosis. In truth, whilessthat virtue which consists in the mere avoidance of vice appealsssdirectly to the understanding, and can thus be circumscribed inssrule, the loftier virtue, which flames in creation, can bessapprehended in its results alone. Rule applies but to the meritsssof denial—to the excellencies which refrain. Beyond these, thesscritical art can but suggest. We may be instructed to build ass“Cato,” but we are in vain told how to conceive a Parthenon or anss“Inferno.” The thing done, however; the wonder accomplished; andssthe capacity for apprehension becomes universal. The sophists ofssthe negative school who, through inability to create, havessscoffed at creation, are now found the loudest in applause. What,ssin its chrysalis condition of principle, affronted their demuressreason, never fails, in its maturity of accomplishment, to extortssadmiration from their instinct of beauty.ss“The author’s observations on the artificial style,” continuedssEllison, “are less objectionable. A mixture of pure art in assgarden scene adds to it a great beauty. This is just; as also isssthe reference to the sense of human interest. The principlessexpressed is incontrovertible—but there may be something beyondssit. There may be an object in keeping with the principle—anssobject unattainable by the means ordinarily possessed byssindividuals, yet which, if attained, would lend a charm to thesslandscape-garden far surpassing that which a sense of merelysshuman interest could bestow. A poet, having very unusualsspecuniary resources, might, while retaining the necessary idea ofssart or culture, or, as our author expresses it, of interest, sossimbue his designs at once with extent and novelty of beauty, asssto convey the sentiment of spiritual interference. It will bessseen that, in bringing about such result, he secures all thessadvantages of interest or design, while relieving his work of thessharshness or technicality of the worldly art. In the most ruggedssof wildernesses—in the most savage of the scenes of puressnature—there is apparent the art of a creator; yet this art isssapparent to reflection only; in no respect has it the obviousssforce of a feeling. Now let us suppose this sense of the Almightyssdesign to be one step depressed—to be brought into something likessharmony or consistency with the sense of human art—to form anssintermedium between the two:—let us imagine, for example, asslandscape whose combined vastness and definitiveness—whose unitedssbeauty, magnificence, and strangeness, shall convey the idea ofsscare, or culture, or superintendence, on the part of beingssssuperior, yet akin to humanity—then the sentiment of interest issspreserved, while the art intervolved is made to assume the air ofssan intermediate or secondary nature—a nature which is not God,ssnor an emanation from God, but which still is nature in the sensessof the handiwork of the angels that hover between man and God.”ssIt was in devoting his enormous wealth to the embodiment of assvision such as this—in the free exercise in the open air ensuredssby the personal superintendence of his plans—in the unceasingssobject which these plans afforded—in the high spirituality of thessobject—in the contempt of ambition which it enabled him truly tossfeel—in the perennial springs with which it gratified, withoutsspossibility of satiating, that one master passion of his soul,ssthe thirst for beauty, above all, it was in the sympathy of asswoman, not unwomanly, whose loveliness and love enveloped hisssexistence in the purple atmosphere of Paradise, that Ellisonssthought to find, and found, exemption from the ordinary cares ofsshumanity, with a far greater amount of positive happiness thanssever glowed in the rapt day-dreams of De Staël.ssI despair of conveying to the reader any distinct conception ofssthe marvels which my friend did actually accomplish. I wish tossdescribe, but am disheartened by the difficulty of description,ssand hesitate between detail and generality. Perhaps the bettersscourse will be to unite the two in their extremes.ssMr. Ellison’s first step regarded, of course, the choice of asslocality, and scarcely had he commenced thinking on this point,sswhen the luxuriant nature of the Pacific Islands arrested hisssattention. In fact, he had made up his mind for a voyage to thessSouth Seas, when a night’s reflection induced him to abandon thessidea. “Were I misanthropic,” he said, “such a locale would suitssme. The thoroughness of its insulation and seclusion, and thessdifficulty of ingress and egress, would in such case be the charmssof charms; but as yet I am not Timon. I wish the composure butssnot the depression of solitude. There must remain with me asscertain control over the extent and duration of my repose. Theresswill be frequent hours in which I shall need, too, the sympathyssof the poetic in what I have done. Let me seek, then, a spot notssfar from a populous city—whose vicinity, also, will best enablessme to execute my plans.”ssIn search of a suitable place so situated, Ellison travelled forssseveral years, and I was permitted to accompany him. A thousandssspots with which I was enraptured he rejected without hesitation,ssfor reasons which satisfied me, in the end, that he was right. Wesscame at length to an elevated table-land of wonderful fertilityssand beauty, affording a panoramic prospect very little less inssextent than that of Aetna, and, in Ellison’s opinion as well asssmy own, surpassing the far-famed view from that mountain in allssthe true elements of the picturesque.ss“I am aware,” said the traveller, as he drew a sigh of deepssdelight after gazing on this scene, entranced, for nearly ansshour, “I know that here, in my circumstances, nine-tenths of thessmost fastidious of men would rest content. This panorama isssindeed glorious, and I should rejoice in it but for the excess ofssits glory. The taste of all the architects I have ever knownssleads them, for the sake of ‘prospect,’ to put up buildings onsshill-tops. The error is obvious. Grandeur in any of its moods,ssbut especially in that of extent, startles, excites—and thenssfatigues, depresses. For the occasional scene nothing can bessbetter—for the constant view nothing worse. And, in the constantssview, the most objectionable phase of grandeur is that of extent;ssthe worst phase of extent, that of distance. It is at war withssthe sentiment and with the sense of seclusion—the sentiment andsssense which we seek to humor in ‘retiring to the country.’ Insslooking from the summit of a mountain we cannot help feelingssabroad in the world. The heart-sick avoid distant prospects as asspestilence.”ssIt was not until toward the close of the fourth year of oursssearch that we found a locality with which Ellison professedsshimself satisfied. It is, of course, needless to say where wasssthe locality. The late death of my friend, in causing his domainssto be thrown open to certain classes of visitors, has given tossArnheim a species of secret and subdued if not solemn celebrity,sssimilar in kind, although infinitely superior in degree, to thatsswhich so long distinguished Fonthill.ssThe usual approach to Arnheim was by the river. The visitor leftssthe city in the early morning. During the forenoon he passedssbetween shores of a tranquil and domestic beauty, on which grazedssinnumerable sheep, their white fleeces spotting the vivid greenssof rolling meadows. By degrees the idea of cultivation subsidedssinto that of merely pastoral care. This slowly became merged in asssense of retirement—this again in a consciousness of solitude. Asssthe evening approached, the channel grew more narrow; the banksssmore and more precipitous; and these latter were clothed in rich,ssmore profuse, and more sombre foliage. The water increased insstransparency. The stream took a thousand turns, so that at nossmoment could its gleaming surface be seen for a greater distancessthan a furlong. At every instant the vessel seemed imprisonedsswithin an enchanted circle, having insuperable and impenetrablesswalls of foliage, a roof of ultramarine satin, and no floor—thesskeel balancing itself with admirable nicety on that of a phantomssbark which, by some accident having been turned upside down,ssfloated in constant company with the substantial one, for thesspurpose of sustaining it. The channel now became a gorge—althoughssthe term is somewhat inapplicable, and I employ it merely becausessthe language has no word which better represents the mostssstriking—not the most distinctive—feature of the scene. Thesscharacter of gorge was maintained only in the height andssparallelism of the shores; it was lost altogether in their othersstraits. The walls of the ravine (through which the clear waterssstill tranquilly flowed) arose to an elevation of a hundred andssoccasionally of a hundred and fifty feet, and inclined so muchsstoward each other as, in a great measure, to shut out the lightssof day; while the long plume-like moss which depended denselyssfrom the intertwining shrubberies overhead, gave the whole chasmssan air of funereal gloom. The windings became more frequent andssintricate, and seemed often as if returning in upon themselves,ssso that the voyager had long lost all idea of direction. He was,ssmoreover, enwrapt in an exquisite sense of the strange. Thessthought of nature still remained, but her character seemed tosshave undergone modification, there was a weird symmetry, assthrilling uniformity, a wizard propriety in these her works. Notssa dead branch—not a withered leaf—not a stray pebble—not a patchssof the brown earth was anywhere visible. The crystal water welledssup against the clean granite, or the unblemished moss, with asssharpness of outline that delighted while it bewildered the eye.ssHaving threaded the mazes of this channel for some hours, thessgloom deepening every moment, a sharp and unexpected turn of thessvessel brought it suddenly, as if dropped from heaven, into asscircular basin of very considerable extent when compared with thesswidth of the gorge. It was about two hundred yards in diameter,ssand girt in at all points but one—that immediately fronting thessvessel as it entered—by hills equal in general height to thesswalls of the chasm, although of a thoroughly different character.ssTheir sides sloped from the water’s edge at an angle of somessforty-five degrees, and they were clothed from base to summit—notssa perceptible point escaping—in a drapery of the most gorgeousssflower-blossoms; scarcely a green leaf being visible among thesssea of odorous and fluctuating color. This basin was of greatssdepth, but so transparent was the water that the bottom, whichssseemed to consist of a thick mass of small round alabastersspebbles, was distinctly visible by glimpses—that is to say,sswhenever the eye could permit itself not to see, far down in thessinverted heaven, the duplicate blooming of the hills. On thesesslatter there were no trees, nor even shrubs of any size. Thessimpressions wrought on the observer were those of richness,sswarmth, color, quietude, uniformity, softness, delicacy,ssdaintiness, voluptuousness, and a miraculous extremeness ofssculture that suggested dreams of a new race of fairies,sslaborious, tasteful, magnificent, and fastidious; but as the eyesstraced upward the myriad-tinted slope, from its sharp junctionsswith the water to its vague termination amid the folds ofssoverhanging cloud, it became, indeed, difficult not to fancy asspanoramic cataract of rubies, sapphires, opals, and goldenssonyxes, rolling silently out of the sky.ssThe visitor, shooting suddenly into this bay from out the gloomssof the ravine, is delighted but astounded by the full orb of thessdeclining sun, which he had supposed to be already far below thesshorizon, but which now confronts him, and forms the solesstermination of an otherwise limitless vista seen through anothersschasm-like rift in the hills.ssBut here the voyager quits the vessel which has borne him so far,ssand descends into a light canoe of ivory, stained with arabesquessdevices in vivid scarlet, both within and without. The poop andssbeak of this boat arise high above the water, with sharp points,ssso that the general form is that of an irregular crescent. Itsslies on the surface of the bay with the proud grace of a swan. Onssits ermined floor reposes a single feathery paddle of satin-wood;ssbut no oarsmen or attendant is to be seen. The guest is bidden tossbe of good cheer—that the fates will take care of him. The largerssvessel disappears, and he is left alone in the canoe, which liesssapparently motionless in the middle of the lake. While hessconsiders what course to pursue, however, he becomes aware of assgentle movement in the fairy bark. It slowly swings itself aroundssuntil its prow points toward the sun. It advances with a gentlessbut gradually accelerated velocity, while the slight ripples itsscreates seem to break about the ivory side in divinestssmelody—seem to offer the only possible explanation of thesssoothing yet melancholy music for whose unseen origin thessbewildered voyager looks around him in vain.ssThe canoe steadily proceeds, and the rocky gate of the vista isssapproached, so that its depths can be more distinctly seen. Tossthe right arise a chain of lofty hills rudely and luxuriantlysswooded. It is observed, however, that the trait of exquisitesscleanness where the bank dips into the water, still prevails.ssThere is not one token of the usual river _débris_. To the leftssthe character of the scene is softer and more obviouslyssartificial. Here the bank slopes upward from the stream in a veryssgentle ascent, forming a broad sward of grass of a texturessresembling nothing so much as velvet, and of a brilliancy ofssgreen which would bear comparison with the tint of the purestssemerald. This plateau varies in width from ten to three hundredssyards; reaching from the river-bank to a wall, fifty feet high,sswhich extends, in an infinity of curves, but following thessgeneral direction of the river, until lost in the distance to thesswestward. This wall is of one continuous rock, and has beenssformed by cutting perpendicularly the once rugged precipice ofssthe stream’s southern bank, but no trace of the labor has beensssuffered to remain. The chiselled stone has the hue of ages, andssis profusely overhung and overspread with the ivy, the coralsshoneysuckle, the eglantine, and the clematis. The uniformity ofssthe top and bottom lines of the wall is fully relieved byssoccasional trees of gigantic height, growing singly or in smallssgroups, both along the plateau and in the domain behind the wall,ssbut in close proximity to it; so that frequent limbs (of thessblack walnut especially) reach over and dip their pendentssextremities into the water. Farther back within the domain, thessvision is impeded by an impenetrable screen of foliage.ssThese things are observed during the canoe’s gradual approach tosswhat I have called the gate of the vista. On drawing nearer tossthis, however, its chasm-like appearance vanishes; a new outletssfrom the bay is discovered to the left—in which direction thesswall is also seen to sweep, still following the general course ofssthe stream. Down this new opening the eye cannot penetrate veryssfar; for the stream, accompanied by the wall, still bends to thessleft, until both are swallowed up by the leaves.ssThe boat, nevertheless, glides magically into the windingsschannel; and here the shore opposite the wall is found tossresemble that opposite the wall in the straight vista. Loftysshills, rising occasionally into mountains, and covered withssvegetation in wild luxuriance, still shut in the scene.ssFloating gently onward, but with a velocity slightly augmented,ssthe voyager, after many short turns, finds his progressssapparently barred by a gigantic gate or rather door of burnishedssgold, elaborately carved and fretted, and reflecting the directssrays of the now fast-sinking sun with an effulgence that seems tosswreath the whole surrounding forest in flames. This gate isssinserted in the lofty wall; which here appears to cross the riverssat right angles. In a few moments, however, it is seen that thessmain body of the water still sweeps in a gentle and extensivesscurve to the left, the wall following it as before, while assstream of considerable volume, diverging from the principal one,ssmakes its way, with a slight ripple, under the door, and is thussshidden from sight. The canoe falls into the lesser channel andssapproaches the gate. Its ponderous wings are slowly and musicallyssexpanded. The boat glides between them, and commences a rapidssdescent into a vast amphitheatre entirely begirt with purplessmountains, whose bases are laved by a gleaming river throughoutssthe full extent of their circuit. Meantime the whole Paradise ofssArnheim bursts upon the view. There is a gush of entrancingssmelody; there is an oppressive sense of strange sweet odor;—theressis a dream-like intermingling to the eye of tall slender Easternsstrees—bosky shrubberies—flocks of golden and crimsonssbirds—lily-fringed lakes—meadows of violets, tulips, poppies,sshyacinths, and tuberoses—long intertangled lines of silverssstreamlets—and, upspringing confusedly from amid all, a mass ofsssemi-Gothic, semi-Saracenic architecture sustaining itself byssmiracle in mid-air, glittering in the red sunlight with a hundredssoriels, minarets, and pinnacles; and seeming the phantomsshandiwork, conjointly, of the Sylphs, of the Fairies, of thessGenii and of the Gnomes.ssLANDOR’S COTTAGEssA Pendant to “The Domain of Arnheim”ssDuring A pedestrian trip last summer, through one or two of thessriver counties of New York, I found myself, as the day declined,sssomewhat embarrassed about the road I was pursuing. The landssundulated very remarkably; and my path, for the last hour, hadsswound about and about so confusedly, in its effort to keep in thessvalleys, that I no longer knew in what direction lay the sweetssvillage of B——, where I had determined to stop for the night. Thesssun had scarcely shone—strictly speaking—during the day, whichssnevertheless, had been unpleasantly warm. A smoky mist,ssresembling that of the Indian summer, enveloped all things, andssof course, added to my uncertainty. Not that I cared much aboutssthe matter. If I did not hit upon the village before sunset, orsseven before dark, it was more than possible that a little Dutchssfarmhouse, or something of that kind, would soon make itsssappearance—although, in fact, the neighborhood (perhaps onssaccount of being more picturesque than fertile) was very sparselyssinhabited. At all events, with my knapsack for a pillow, and mysshound as a sentry, a bivouac in the open air was just the thingsswhich would have amused me. I sauntered on, therefore, quite atssease—Ponto taking charge of my gun—until at length, just as I hadssbegun to consider whether the numerous little glades that ledsshither and thither, were intended to be paths at all, I wasssconducted by one of them into an unquestionable carriage track.ssThere could be no mistaking it. The traces of light wheels weressevident; and although the tall shrubberies and overgrownssundergrowth met overhead, there was no obstruction whateverssbelow, even to the passage of a Virginian mountain wagon—the mostssaspiring vehicle, I take it, of its kind. The road, however,ssexcept in being open through the wood—if wood be not too weightyssa name for such an assemblage of light trees—and except in thessparticulars of evident wheel-tracks—bore no resemblance to anyssroad I had before seen. The tracks of which I speak were butssfaintly perceptible—having been impressed upon the firm, yetsspleasantly moist surface of—what looked more like green Genoesessvelvet than any thing else. It was grass, clearly—but grass suchssas we seldom see out of England—so short, so thick, so even, andssso vivid in color. Not a single impediment lay in thesswheel-route—not even a chip or dead twig. The stones that oncessobstructed the way had been carefully _placed_—not thrown—alongssthe sides of the lane, so as to define its boundaries at bottomsswith a kind of half-precise, half-negligent, and whollysspicturesque definition. Clumps of wild flowers grew everywhere,ssluxuriantly, in the interspaces.ssWhat to make of all this, of course I knew not. Here was artssundoubtedly—that did not surprise me—all roads, in the ordinarysssense, are works of art; nor can I say that there was much tosswonder at in the mere excess of art manifested; all that seemedssto have been done, might have been done here—with such naturalss“capabilities” (as they have it in the books on LandscapessGardening)—with very little labor and expense. No; it was not thessamount but the character of the art which caused me to take assseat on one of the blossomy stones and gaze up and down thisssfairy-like avenue for half an hour or more in bewilderedssadmiration. One thing became more and more evident the longer Issgazed: an artist, and one with a most scrupulous eye for form,sshad superintended all these arrangements. The greatest care hadssbeen taken to preserve a due medium between the neat and gracefulsson the one hand, and the pittoresque, in the true sense of thessItalian term, on the other. There were few straight, and no longssuninterrupted lines. The same effect of curvature or of colorssappeared twice, usually, but not oftener, at any one point ofssview. Everywhere was variety in uniformity. It was a piece ofss“composition,” in which the most fastidiously critical tastesscould scarcely have suggested an emendation.ssI had turned to the right as I entered this road, and now,ssarising, I continued in the same direction. The path was sossserpentine, that at no moment could I trace its course for moressthan two or three paces in advance. Its character did not undergossany material change.ssPresently the murmur of water fell gently upon my ear—and in assfew moments afterward, as I turned with the road somewhat moressabruptly than hitherto, I became aware that a building of somesskind lay at the foot of a gentle declivity just before me. Isscould see nothing distinctly on account of the mist whichssoccupied all the little valley below. A gentle breeze, however,ssnow arose, as the sun was about descending; and while I remainedssstanding on the brow of the slope, the fog gradually becamessdissipated into wreaths, and so floated over the scene.ssAs it came fully into view—thus gradually as I describe it—piecessby piece, here a tree, there a glimpse of water, and here againssthe summit of a chimney, I could scarcely help fancying that thesswhole was one of the ingenious illusions sometimes exhibitedssunder the name of “vanishing pictures.”ssBy the time, however, that the fog had thoroughly disappeared,ssthe sun had made its way down behind the gentle hills, andssthence, as if with a slight chassez to the south, had come againssfully into sight, glaring with a purplish lustre through a chasmssthat entered the valley from the west. Suddenly, therefore—and asssif by the hand of magic—this whole valley and every thing in itssbecame brilliantly visible.ssThe first _coup d’œil_, as the sun slid into the positionssdescribed, impressed me very much as I have been impressed, whenssa boy, by the concluding scene of some well-arranged theatricalssspectacle or melodrama. Not even the monstrosity of color wassswanting; for the sunlight came out through the chasm, tinted allssorange and purple; while the vivid green of the grass in thessvalley was reflected more or less upon all objects from thesscurtain of vapor that still hung overhead, as if loth to take itssstotal departure from a scene so enchantingly beautiful.ssThe little vale into which I thus peered down from under the fogsscanopy could not have been more than four hundred yards long;sswhile in breadth it varied from fifty to one hundred and fifty orssperhaps two hundred. It was most narrow at its northernssextremity, opening out as it tended southwardly, but with no veryssprecise regularity. The widest portion was within eighty yards ofssthe southern extreme. The slopes which encompassed the vale couldssnot fairly be called hills, unless at their northern face. Here assprecipitous ledge of granite arose to a height of some ninetyssfeet; and, as I have mentioned, the valley at this point was notssmore than fifty feet wide; but as the visitor proceededsssouthwardly from the cliff, he found on his right hand and on hisssleft, declivities at once less high, less precipitous, and lessssrocky. All, in a word, sloped and softened to the south; and yetssthe whole vale was engirdled by eminences, more or less high,ssexcept at two points. One of these I have already spoken of. Itsslay considerably to the north of west, and was where the settingsssun made its way, as I have before described, into thessamphitheatre, through a cleanly cut natural cleft in the granitessembankment; this fissure might have been ten yards wide at itssswidest point, so far as the eye could trace it. It seemed to leadssup, up like a natural causeway, into the recesses of unexploredssmountains and forests. The other opening was directly at thesssouthern end of the vale. Here, generally, the slopes weressnothing more than gentle inclinations, extending from east tosswest about one hundred and fifty yards. In the middle of thisssextent was a depression, level with the ordinary floor of thessvalley. As regards vegetation, as well as in respect to everyssthing else, the scene softened and sloped to the south. To thessnorth—on the craggy precipice—a few paces from the verge—upsssprang the magnificent trunks of numerous hickories, blacksswalnuts, and chestnuts, interspersed with occasional oak; and thessstrong lateral branches thrown out by the walnuts especially,ssspread far over the edge of the cliff. Proceeding southwardly,ssthe explorer saw, at first, the same class of trees, but less andssless lofty and Salvatorish in character; then he saw the gentlersselm, succeeded by the sassafras and locust—these again by thesssofter linden, red-bud, catalpa, and maple—these yet again byssstill more graceful and more modest varieties. The whole face ofssthe southern declivity was covered with wild shrubbery alone—anssoccasional silver willow or white poplar excepted. In the bottomssof the valley itself—(for it must be borne in mind that thessvegetation hitherto mentioned grew only on the cliffs orsshillsides)—were to be seen three insulated trees. One was an elmssof fine size and exquisite form: it stood guard over the southernssgate of the vale. Another was a hickory, much larger than thesselm, and altogether a much finer tree, although both weressexceedingly beautiful: it seemed to have taken charge of thessnorthwestern entrance, springing from a group of rocks in thessvery jaws of the ravine, and throwing its graceful body, at anssangle of nearly forty-five degrees, far out into the sunshine ofssthe amphitheatre. About thirty yards east of this tree stood,sshowever, the pride of the valley, and beyond all question thessmost magnificent tree I have ever seen, unless, perhaps, amongssthe cypresses of the Itchiatuckanee. It was a triple-stemmedsstulip-tree—the Liriodendron Tulipiferum—one of the natural orderssof magnolias. Its three trunks separated from the parent at aboutssthree feet from the soil, and diverging very slightly andssgradually, were not more than four feet apart at the point wheressthe largest stem shot out into foliage: this was at an elevationssof about eighty feet. The whole height of the principal divisionsswas one hundred and twenty feet. Nothing can surpass in beautyssthe form, or the glossy, vivid green of the leaves of thesstulip-tree. In the present instance they were fully eight inchessswide; but their glory was altogether eclipsed by the gorgeoussssplendor of the profuse blossoms. Conceive, closely congregated,ssa million of the largest and most resplendent tulips! Only thussscan the reader get any idea of the picture I would convey. Andssthen the stately grace of the clean, delicately-granulatedsscolumnar stems, the largest four feet in diameter, at twenty fromssthe ground. The innumerable blossoms, mingling with those ofssother trees scarcely less beautiful, although infinitely lessssmajestic, filled the valley with more than Arabian perfumes.ssThe general floor of the amphitheatre was grass of the samesscharacter as that I had found in the road; if anything, moressdeliciously soft, thick, velvety, and miraculously green. It wassshard to conceive how all this beauty had been attained.ssI have spoken of two openings into the vale. From the one to thessnorthwest issued a rivulet, which came, gently murmuring andssslightly foaming, down the ravine, until it dashed against thessgroup of rocks out of which sprang the insulated hickory. Here,ssafter encircling the tree, it passed on a little to the north ofsseast, leaving the tulip tree some twenty feet to the south, andssmaking no decided alteration in its course until it came near thessmidway between the eastern and western boundaries of the valley.ssAt this point, after a series of sweeps, it turned off at rightssangles and pursued a generally southern direction meandering asssit went—until it became lost in a small lake of irregular figuress(although roughly oval), that lay gleaming near the lowerssextremity of the vale. This lakelet was, perhaps, a hundred yardsssin diameter at its widest part. No crystal could be clearer thanssits waters. Its bottom, which could be distinctly seen, consistedssaltogether, of pebbles brilliantly white. Its banks, of thessemerald grass already described, rounded, rather than sloped, offssinto the clear heaven below; and so clear was this heaven, sossperfectly, at times, did it reflect all objects above it, thatsswhere the true bank ended and where the mimic one commenced, itsswas a point of no little difficulty to determine. The trout, andsssome other varieties of fish, with which this pond seemed to bessalmost inconveniently crowded, had all the appearance ofssveritable flying-fish. It was almost impossible to believe thatssthey were not absolutely suspended in the air. A light birchsscanoe that lay placidly on the water, was reflected in itsssminutest fibres with a fidelity unsurpassed by the mostssexquisitely polished mirror. A small island, fairly laughing withssflowers in full bloom, and affording little more space than justssenough for a picturesque little building, seemingly assfowl-house—arose from the lake not far from its northern shore—tosswhich it was connected by means of an inconceivably light-lookingssand yet very primitive bridge. It was formed of a single, broadssand thick plank of the tulip wood. This was forty feet long, andssspanned the interval between shore and shore with a slight butssvery perceptible arch, preventing all oscillation. From thesssouthern extreme of the lake issued a continuation of thessrivulet, which, after meandering for, perhaps, thirty yards,ssfinally passed through the “depression” (already described) inssthe middle of the southern declivity, and tumbling down a sheerssprecipice of a hundred feet, made its devious and unnoticed wayssto the Hudson.ssThe lake was deep—at some points thirty feet—but the rivuletssseldom exceeded three, while its greatest width was about eight.ssIts bottom and banks were as those of the pond—if a defect couldsshave been attributed, in point of picturesqueness, it was that ofssexcessive neatness.ssThe expanse of the green turf was relieved, here and there, by anssoccasional showy shrub, such as the hydrangea, or the commonsssnowball, or the aromatic seringa; or, more frequently, by assclump of geraniums blossoming gorgeously in great varieties.ssThese latter grew in pots which were carefully buried in thesssoil, so as to give the plants the appearance of beingssindigenous. Besides all this, the lawn’s velvet was exquisitelyssspotted with sheep—a considerable flock of which roamed about thessvale, in company with three tamed deer, and a vast number ofssbrilliantly-plumed ducks. A very large mastiff seemed to be inssvigilant attendance upon these animals, each and all.ssAlong the eastern and western cliffs—where, toward the upperssportion of the amphitheatre, the boundaries were more or lessssprecipitous—grew ivy in great profusion—so that only here andssthere could even a glimpse of the naked rock be obtained. Thessnorthern precipice, in like manner, was almost entirely clothedssby grape-vines of rare luxuriance; some springing from the soilssat the base of the cliff, and others from ledges on its face.ssThe slight elevation which formed the lower boundary of thissslittle domain, was crowned by a neat stone wall, of sufficientssheight to prevent the escape of the deer. Nothing of the fencesskind was observable elsewhere; for nowhere else was an artificialssenclosure needed:—any stray sheep, for example, which shouldssattempt to make its way out of the vale by means of the ravine,sswould find its progress arrested, after a few yards’ advance, byssthe precipitous ledge of rock over which tumbled the cascade thatsshad arrested my attention as I first drew near the domain. Inssshort, the only ingress or egress was through a gate occupying assrocky pass in the road, a few paces below the point at which Issstopped to reconnoitre the scene.ssI have described the brook as meandering very irregularly throughssthe whole of its course. Its two general directions, as I havesssaid, were first from west to east, and then from north to south.ssAt the turn, the stream, sweeping backward, made an almostsscircular loop, so as to form a peninsula which was very nearly anssisland, and which included about the sixteenth of an acre. Onssthis peninsula stood a dwelling-house—and when I say that thissshouse, like the infernal terrace seen by Vathek, “etait d’unessarchitecture inconnue dans les annales de la terre,” I mean,ssmerely, that its tout ensemble struck me with the keenest sensessof combined novelty and propriety—in a word, of poetry—(for, thanssin the words just employed, I could scarcely give, of poetry inssthe abstract, a more rigorous definition)—and I do not mean thatssmerely outre was perceptible in any respect.ssIn fact nothing could well be more simple—more utterlyssunpretending than this cottage. Its marvellous effect layssaltogether in its artistic arrangement as a picture. I could havessfancied, while I looked at it, that some eminentsslandscape-painter had built it with his brush.ssThe point of view from which I first saw the valley, was notssaltogether, although it was nearly, the best point from which tosssurvey the house. I will therefore describe it as I afterwardssssaw it—from a position on the stone wall at the southern extremessof the amphitheatre.ssThe main building was about twenty-four feet long and sixteenssbroad—certainly not more. Its total height, from the ground tossthe apex of the roof, could not have exceeded eighteen feet. Tossthe west end of this structure was attached one about a thirdsssmaller in all its proportions:—the line of its front standingssback about two yards from that of the larger house, and the linessof its roof, of course, being considerably depressed below thatssof the roof adjoining. At right angles to these buildings, andssfrom the rear of the main one—not exactly in the middle—extendedssa third compartment, very small—being, in general, one-third lessssthan the western wing. The roofs of the two larger were verysssteep—sweeping down from the ridge-beam with a long concavesscurve, and extending at least four feet beyond the walls inssfront, so as to form the roofs of two piazzas. These latterssroofs, of course, needed no support; but as they had the air ofssneeding it, slight and perfectly plain pillars were inserted atssthe corners alone. The roof of the northern wing was merely anssextension of a portion of the main roof. Between the chiefssbuilding and western wing arose a very tall and rather slendersssquare chimney of hard Dutch bricks, alternately black and red:—assslight cornice of projecting bricks at the top. Over the gablesssthe roofs also projected very much:—in the main building aboutssfour feet to the east and two to the west. The principal door wasssnot exactly in the main division, being a little to thesseast—while the two windows were to the west. These latter did notssextend to the floor, but were much longer and narrower thanssusual—they had single shutters like doors—the panes were ofsslozenge form, but quite large. The door itself had its upper halfssof glass, also in lozenge panes—a movable shutter secured it atssnight. The door to the west wing was in its gable, and quitesssimple—a single window looked out to the south. There was nossexternal door to the north wing, and it also had only one windowssto the east.ssThe blank wall of the eastern gable was relieved by stairs (withssa balustrade) running diagonally across it—the ascent being fromssthe south. Under cover of the widely projecting eave these stepsssgave access to a door leading to the garret, or rather loft—forssit was lighted only by a single window to the north, and seemedssto have been intended as a store-room.ssThe piazzas of the main building and western wing had no floors,ssas is usual; but at the doors and at each window, large, flatssirregular slabs of granite lay imbedded in the delicious turf,ssaffording comfortable footing in all weather. Excellent paths ofssthe same material—not nicely adapted, but with the velvety sodssfilling frequent intervals between the stones, led hither andssthither from the house, to a crystal spring about five paces off,ssto the road, or to one or two out-houses that lay to the north,ssbeyond the brook, and were thoroughly concealed by a few locustsssand catalpas.ssNot more than six steps from the main door of the cottage stoodssthe dead trunk of a fantastic pear-tree, so clothed from head tossfoot in the gorgeous bignonia blossoms that one required nosslittle scrutiny to determine what manner of sweet thing it couldssbe. From various arms of this tree hung cages of different kinds.ssIn one, a large wicker cylinder with a ring at top, revelled assmocking bird; in another an oriole; in a third the impudentssbobolink—while three or four more delicate prisons were loudlyssvocal with canaries.ssThe pillars of the piazza were enwreathed in jasmine and sweetsshoneysuckle; while from the angle formed by the main structuressand its west wing, in front, sprang a grape-vine of unexampledssluxuriance. Scorning all restraint, it had clambered first to thesslower roof—then to the higher; and along the ridge of this latterssit continued to writhe on, throwing out tendrils to the right andssleft, until at length it fairly attained the east gable, and fellsstrailing over the stairs.ssThe whole house, with its wings, was constructed of thessold-fashioned Dutch shingles—broad, and with unrounded corners.ssIt is a peculiarity of this material to give houses built of itssthe appearance of being wider at bottom than at top—after thessmanner of Egyptian architecture; and in the present instance,ssthis exceedingly picturesque effect was aided by numerous pots ofssgorgeous flowers that almost encompassed the base of thessbuildings.ssThe shingles were painted a dull gray; and the happiness withsswhich this neutral tint melted into the vivid green of the tulipsstree leaves that partially overshadowed the cottage, can readilyssbe conceived by an artist.ssFrom the position near the stone wall, as described, thessbuildings were seen at great advantage—for the southeastern anglesswas thrown forward—so that the eye took in at once the whole ofssthe two fronts, with the picturesque eastern gable, and at thesssame time obtained just a sufficient glimpse of the northernsswing, with parts of a pretty roof to the spring-house, and nearlysshalf of a light bridge that spanned the brook in the nearssvicinity of the main buildings.ssI did not remain very long on the brow of the hill, although longssenough to make a thorough survey of the scene at my feet. It wasssclear that I had wandered from the road to the village, and I hadssthus good traveller’s excuse to open the gate before me, andssinquire my way, at all events; so, without more ado, I proceeded.ssThe road, after passing the gate, seemed to lie upon a naturalssledge, sloping gradually down along the face of the north-easternsscliffs. It led me on to the foot of the northern precipice, andssthence over the bridge, round by the eastern gable to the frontssdoor. In this progress, I took notice that no sight of thessout-houses could be obtained.ssAs I turned the corner of the gable, the mastiff bounded towardsssme in stern silence, but with the eye and the whole air of asstiger. I held him out my hand, however, in token of amity—and Issnever yet knew the dog who was proof against such an appeal tosshis courtesy. He not only shut his mouth and wagged his tail, butssabsolutely offered me his paw—afterward extending his civilitiesssto Ponto.ssAs no bell was discernible, I rapped with my stick against thessdoor, which stood half open. Instantly a figure advanced to thessthreshold—that of a young woman about twenty-eight years ofssage—slender, or rather slight, and somewhat above the mediumssheight. As she approached, with a certain modest decision of stepssaltogether indescribable. I said to myself, “Surely here I havessfound the perfection of natural, in contradistinction fromssartificial grace.” The second impression which she made on me,ssbut by far the more vivid of the two, was that of enthusiasm. Sossintense an expression of romance, perhaps I should call it, or ofssunworldliness, as that which gleamed from her deep-set eyes, hadssnever so sunk into my heart of hearts before. I know not how itssis, but this peculiar expression of the eye, wreathing itselfssoccasionally into the lips, is the most powerful, if notssabsolutely the sole spell, which rivets my interest in woman.ss“Romance,” provided my readers fully comprehended what I wouldsshere imply by the word—“romance” and “womanliness” seem to messconvertible terms: and, after all, what man truly loves in woman,ssis simply her womanhood. The eyes of Annie (I heard some one fromssthe interior call her “Annie, darling!”) were “spiritual grey;”ssher hair, a light chestnut: this is all I had time to observe ofssher.ssAt her most courteous of invitations, I entered—passing firstssinto a tolerably wide vestibule. Having come mainly to observe, Isstook notice that to my right as I stepped in, was a window, suchssas those in front of the house; to the left, a door leading intossthe principal room; while, opposite me, an open door enabled messto see a small apartment, just the size of the vestibule,ssarranged as a study, and having a large bow window looking out tossthe north.ssPassing into the parlor, I found myself with Mr. Landor—for this,ssI afterwards found, was his name. He was civil, even cordial insshis manner, but just then, I was more intent on observing thessarrangements of the dwelling which had so much interested me,ssthan the personal appearance of the tenant.ssThe north wing, I now saw, was a bed-chamber, its door openedssinto the parlor. West of this door was a single window, lookingsstoward the brook. At the west end of the parlor, were assfireplace, and a door leading into the west wing—probably asskitchen.ssNothing could be more rigorously simple than the furniture of thessparlor. On the floor was an ingrain carpet, of excellentsstexture—a white ground, spotted with small circular greenssfigures. At the windows were curtains of snowy white jaconetssmuslin: they were tolerably full, and hung decisively, perhapsssrather formally in sharp, parallel plaits to the floor—just tossthe floor. The walls were prepared with a French paper of greatssdelicacy, a silver ground, with a faint green cord runningsszig-zag throughout. Its expanse was relieved merely by three ofssJulien’s exquisite lithographs a trois crayons, fastened to thesswall without frames. One of these drawings was a scene ofssOriental luxury, or rather voluptuousness; another was ass“carnival piece,” spirited beyond compare; the third was a Greekssfemale head—a face so divinely beautiful, and yet of anssexpression so provokingly indeterminate, never before arrested myssattention.ssThe more substantial furniture consisted of a round table, a fewsschairs (including a large rocking-chair), and a sofa, or ratherss“settee;” its material was plain maple painted a creamy white,ssslightly interstriped with green; the seat of cane. The chairsssand table were “to match,” but the forms of all had evidentlyssbeen designed by the same brain which planned “the grounds;” itssis impossible to conceive anything more graceful.ssOn the table were a few books; a large, square, crystal bottle ofsssome novel perfume; a plain ground glass _astral_ (not solar)sslamp with an Italian shade; and a large vase ofssresplendently-blooming flowers. Flowers, indeed, of gorgeoussscolours and delicate odour formed the sole mere decoration of thessapartment. The fire-place was nearly filled with a vase ofssbrilliant geranium. On a triangular shelf in each angle of thessroom stood also a similar vase, varied only as to its lovelysscontents. One or two smaller bouquets adorned the mantel, andsslate violets clustered about the open windows.ssIt is not the purpose of this work to do more than give inssdetail, a picture of Mr. Landor’s residence—as I found it. How hessmade it what it was—and why—with some particulars of Mr. Landorsshimself—may, possibly form the subject of another article.ssWILLIAM WILSONssWhat say of it? what say of CONSCIENCE grim,ssThat spectre in my path?ss—_Chamberlayne’s Pharronida._ssLet me call myself, for the present, William Wilson. The fairsspage now lying before me need not be sullied with my realssappellation. This has been already too much an object for thessscorn—for the horror—for the detestation of my race. To thessuttermost regions of the globe have not the indignant windsssbruited its unparalleled infamy? Oh, outcast of all outcasts mostssabandoned!—to the earth art thou not forever dead? to its honors,ssto its flowers, to its golden aspirations?—and a cloud, dense,ssdismal, and limitless, does it not hang eternally between thysshopes and heaven?ssI would not, if I could, here or to-day, embody a record of mysslater years of unspeakable misery, and unpardonable crime. Thisssepoch—these later years—took unto themselves a sudden elevationssin turpitude, whose origin alone it is my present purpose tossassign. Men usually grow base by degrees. From me, in an instant,ssall virtue dropped bodily as a mantle. From comparatively trivialsswickedness I passed, with the stride of a giant, into more thanssthe enormities of an Elah-Gabalus. What chance—what one eventssbrought this evil thing to pass, bear with me while I relate.ssDeath approaches; and the shadow which foreruns him has thrown asssoftening influence over my spirit. I long, in passing throughssthe dim valley, for the sympathy—I had nearly said for thesspity—of my fellow men. I would fain have them believe that I havessbeen, in some measure, the slave of circumstances beyond humansscontrol. I would wish them to seek out for me, in the details Issam about to give, some little oasis of fatality amid a wildernessssof error. I would have them allow—what they cannot refrain fromssallowing—that, although temptation may have erewhile existed asssgreat, man was never thus, at least, tempted before—certainly,ssnever thus fell. And is it therefore that he has never thussssuffered? Have I not indeed been living in a dream? And am I notssnow dying a victim to the horror and the mystery of the wildestssof all sublunary visions?ssI am the descendant of a race whose imaginative and easilyssexcitable temperament has at all times rendered them remarkable;ssand, in my earliest infancy, I gave evidence of having fullyssinherited the family character. As I advanced in years it wasssmore strongly developed; becoming, for many reasons, a cause ofssserious disquietude to my friends, and of positive injury tossmyself. I grew self-willed, addicted to the wildest caprices, andssa prey to the most ungovernable passions. Weak-minded, and besetsswith constitutional infirmities akin to my own, my parents couldssdo but little to check the evil propensities which distinguishedssme. Some feeble and ill-directed efforts resulted in completessfailure on their part, and, of course, in total triumph on mine.ssThenceforward my voice was a household law; and at an age whenssfew children have abandoned their leading-strings, I was left tossthe guidance of my own will, and became, in all but name, thessmaster of my own actions.ssMy earliest recollections of a school-life, are connected with asslarge, rambling, Elizabethan house, in a misty-looking village ofssEngland, where were a vast number of gigantic and gnarled trees,ssand where all the houses were excessively ancient. In truth, itsswas a dream-like and spirit-soothing place, that venerable oldsstown. At this moment, in fancy, I feel the refreshing chillinessssof its deeply-shadowed avenues, inhale the fragrance of itsssthousand shrubberies, and thrill anew with undefinable delight,ssat the deep hollow note of the church-bell, breaking, each hour,sswith sullen and sudden roar, upon the stillness of the duskyssatmosphere in which the fretted Gothic steeple lay imbedded andssasleep.ssIt gives me, perhaps, as much of pleasure as I can now in anyssmanner experience, to dwell upon minute recollections of thessschool and its concerns. Steeped in misery as I am—misery, alas!ssonly too real—I shall be pardoned for seeking relief, howeverssslight and temporary, in the weakness of a few rambling details.ssThese, moreover, utterly trivial, and even ridiculous inssthemselves, assume, to my fancy, adventitious importance, asssconnected with a period and a locality when and where I recognisessthe first ambiguous monitions of the destiny which afterwards sossfully overshadowed me. Let me then remember.ssThe house, I have said, was old and irregular. The grounds weressextensive, and a high and solid brick wall, topped with a bed ofssmortar and broken glass, encompassed the whole. This prison-likessrampart formed the limit of our domain; beyond it we saw butssthrice a week—once every Saturday afternoon, when, attended bysstwo ushers, we were permitted to take brief walks in a bodyssthrough some of the neighbouring fields—and twice during Sunday,sswhen we were paraded in the same formal manner to the morning andssevening service in the one church of the village. Of this churchssthe principal of our school was pastor. With how deep a spirit ofsswonder and perplexity was I wont to regard him from our remotesspew in the gallery, as, with step solemn and slow, he ascendedssthe pulpit! This reverend man, with countenance so demurelyssbenign, with robes so glossy and so clerically flowing, with wigssso minutely powdered, so rigid and so vast,—-could this be hesswho, of late, with sour visage, and in snuffy habiliments,ssadministered, ferule in hand, the Draconian laws of the academy?ssOh, gigantic paradox, too utterly monstrous for solution!ssAt an angle of the ponderous wall frowned a more ponderous gate.ssIt was riveted and studded with iron bolts, and surmounted withssjagged iron spikes. What impressions of deep awe did it inspire!ssIt was never opened save for the three periodical egressions andssingressions already mentioned; then, in every creak of its mightysshinges, we found a plenitude of mystery—a world of matter forsssolemn remark, or for more solemn meditation.ssThe extensive enclosure was irregular in form, having manysscapacious recesses. Of these, three or four of the largestssconstituted the play-ground. It was level, and covered with finesshard gravel. I well remember it had no trees, nor benches, norssanything similar within it. Of course it was in the rear of thesshouse. In front lay a small parterre, planted with box and otherssshrubs, but through this sacred division we passed only upon raressoccasions indeed—such as a first advent to school or finalssdeparture thence, or perhaps, when a parent or friend havingsscalled for us, we joyfully took our way home for the Christmas orssMidsummer holidays.ssBut the house!—how quaint an old building was this!—to me howssveritably a palace of enchantment! There was really no end to itssswindings—to its incomprehensible subdivisions. It was difficult,ssat any given time, to say with certainty upon which of its twossstories one happened to be. From each room to every other theresswere sure to be found three or four steps either in ascent orssdescent. Then the lateral branches weressinnumerable—inconceivable—and so returning in upon themselves,ssthat our most exact ideas in regard to the whole mansion were notssvery far different from those with which we pondered uponssinfinity. During the five years of my residence here, I was neverssable to ascertain with precision, in what remote locality lay thesslittle sleeping apartment assigned to myself and some eighteen orsstwenty other scholars.ssThe school-room was the largest in the house—I could not helpssthinking, in the world. It was very long, narrow, and dismallysslow, with pointed Gothic windows and a ceiling of oak. In assremote and terror-inspiring angle was a square enclosure of eightssor ten feet, comprising the sanctum, “during hours,” of ourssprincipal, the Reverend Dr. Bransby. It was a solid structure,sswith massy door, sooner than open which in the absence of thess“Dominie,” we would all have willingly perished by the _peinessforte et dure_. In other angles were two other similar boxes, farssless reverenced, indeed, but still greatly matters of awe. One ofssthese was the pulpit of the “classical” usher, one of thess“English and mathematical.” Interspersed about the room, crossingssand recrossing in endless irregularity, were innumerable benchesssand desks, black, ancient, and time-worn, piled desperately withssmuch-bethumbed books, and so beseamed with initial letters, namesssat full length, grotesque figures, and other multiplied effortsssof the knife, as to have entirely lost what little of originalssform might have been their portion in days long departed. A hugessbucket with water stood at one extremity of the room, and a clockssof stupendous dimensions at the other.ssEncompassed by the massy walls of this venerable academy, Isspassed, yet not in tedium or disgust, the years of the thirdsslustrum of my life. The teeming brain of childhood requires nossexternal world of incident to occupy or amuse it; and thessapparently dismal monotony of a school was replete with moressintense excitement than my riper youth has derived from luxury,ssor my full manhood from crime. Yet I must believe that my firstssmental development had in it much of the uncommon—even much ofssthe _outré_. Upon mankind at large the events of very earlyssexistence rarely leave in mature age any definite impression. Allssis gray shadow—a weak and irregular remembrance—an indistinctssregathering of feeble pleasures and phantasmagoric pains. With messthis is not so. In childhood I must have felt with the energy ofssa man what I now find stamped upon memory in lines as vivid, asssdeep, and as durable as the _exergues_ of the Carthaginianssmedals.ssYet in fact—in the fact of the world’s view—how little was theressto remember! The morning’s awakening, the nightly summons to bed;ssthe connings, the recitations; the periodical half-holidays, andssperambulations; the play-ground, with its broils, its pastimes,ssits intrigues;—these, by a mental sorcery long forgotten, weressmade to involve a wilderness of sensation, a world of richssincident, an universe of varied emotion, of excitement the mostsspassionate and spirit-stirring. “_Oh, le bon temps, que ce sièclessde fer!_”ssIn truth, the ardor, the enthusiasm, and the imperiousness of myssdisposition, soon rendered me a marked character among myssschoolmates, and by slow, but natural gradations, gave me anssascendancy over all not greatly older than myself;—over all withssa single exception. This exception was found in the person of assscholar, who, although no relation, bore the same Christian andsssurname as myself;—a circumstance, in fact, little remarkable;ssfor, notwithstanding a noble descent, mine was one of thosesseveryday appellations which seem, by prescriptive right, to havessbeen, time out of mind, the common property of the mob. In thisssnarrative I have therefore designated myself as William Wilson,—assfictitious title not very dissimilar to the real. My namesakessalone, of those who in school phraseology constituted “our set,”sspresumed to compete with me in the studies of the class—in thesssports and broils of the play-ground—to refuse implicit belief inssmy assertions, and submission to my will—indeed, to interferesswith my arbitrary dictation in any respect whatsoever. If theressis on earth a supreme and unqualified despotism, it is thessdespotism of a master-mind in boyhood over the less energeticssspirits of its companions.ssWilson’s rebellion was to me a source of the greatestssembarrassment; the more so as, in spite of the bravado with whichssin public I made a point of treating him and his pretensions, Isssecretly felt that I feared him, and could not help thinking thessequality which he maintained so easily with myself, a proof ofsshis true superiority; since not to be overcome cost me assperpetual struggle. Yet this superiority—even this equality—wasssin truth acknowledged by no one but myself; our associates, bysssome unaccountable blindness, seemed not even to suspect it.ssIndeed, his competition, his resistance, and especially hisssimpertinent and dogged interference with my purposes, were notssmore pointed than private. He appeared to be destitute alike ofssthe ambition which urged, and of the passionate energy of mindsswhich enabled me to excel. In his rivalry he might have beensssupposed actuated solely by a whimsical desire to thwart,ssastonish, or mortify myself; although there were times when Isscould not help observing, with a feeling made up of wonder,ssabasement, and pique, that he mingled with his injuries, hisssinsults, or his contradictions, a certain most inappropriate, andssassuredly most unwelcome affectionateness of manner. I could onlyssconceive this singular behavior to arise from a consummatessself-conceit assuming the vulgar airs of patronage andssprotection.ssPerhaps it was this latter trait in Wilson’s conduct, conjoinedsswith our identity of name, and the mere accident of our havingssentered the school upon the same day, which set afloat the notionssthat we were brothers, among the senior classes in the academy.ssThese do not usually inquire with much strictness into thessaffairs of their juniors. I have before said, or should havesssaid, that Wilson was not, in the most remote degree, connectedsswith my family. But assuredly if we had been brothers we mustsshave been twins; for, after leaving Dr. Bransby’s, I casuallysslearned that my namesake was born on the nineteenth of January,ss1813—and this is a somewhat remarkable coincidence; for the dayssis precisely that of my own nativity.ssIt may seem strange that in spite of the continual anxietyssoccasioned me by the rivalry of Wilson, and his intolerablessspirit of contradiction, I could not bring myself to hate himssaltogether. We had, to be sure, nearly every day a quarrel insswhich, yielding me publicly the palm of victory, he, in somessmanner, contrived to make me feel that it was he who had deservedssit; yet a sense of pride on my part, and a veritable dignity onsshis own, kept us always upon what are called “speaking terms,”sswhile there were many points of strong congeniality in oursstempers, operating to awake me in a sentiment which our positionssalone, perhaps, prevented from ripening into friendship. It isssdifficult, indeed, to define, or even to describe, my realssfeelings towards him. They formed a motley and heterogeneousssadmixture;—some petulant animosity, which was not yet hatred,sssome esteem, more respect, much fear, with a world of uneasysscuriosity. To the moralist it will be unnecessary to say, inssaddition, that Wilson and myself were the most inseparable ofsscompanions.ssIt was no doubt the anomalous state of affairs existing betweenssus, which turned all my attacks upon him, (and they were many,sseither open or covert) into the channel of banter or practicalssjoke (giving pain while assuming the aspect of mere fun) ratherssthan into a more serious and determined hostility. But myssendeavours on this head were by no means uniformly successful,sseven when my plans were the most wittily concocted; for myssnamesake had much about him, in character, of that unassuming andssquiet austerity which, while enjoying the poignancy of its ownssjokes, has no heel of Achilles in itself, and absolutely refusesssto be laughed at. I could find, indeed, but one vulnerable point,ssand that, lying in a personal peculiarity, arising, perhaps, fromssconstitutional disease, would have been spared by any antagonistssless at his wit’s end than myself;—my rival had a weakness in thessfaucal or guttural organs, which precluded him from raising hisssvoice at any time above a very low whisper. Of this defect I didssnot fail to take what poor advantage lay in my power.ssWilson’s retaliations in kind were many; and there was one formssof his practical wit that disturbed me beyond measure. How hissssagacity first discovered at all that so petty a thing would vexssme, is a question I never could solve; but, having discovered, hesshabitually practised the annoyance. I had always felt aversion tossmy uncourtly patronymic, and its very common, if not plebeiansspraenomen. The words were venom in my ears; and when, upon thessday of my arrival, a second William Wilson came also to thessacademy, I felt angry with him for bearing the name, and doublyssdisgusted with the name because a stranger bore it, who would bessthe cause of its twofold repetition, who would be constantly inssmy presence, and whose concerns, in the ordinary routine of thessschool business, must inevitably, on account of the detestablesscoincidence, be often confounded with my own.ssThe feeling of vexation thus engendered grew stronger with everysscircumstance tending to show resemblance, moral or physical,ssbetween my rival and myself. I had not then discovered thessremarkable fact that we were of the same age; but I saw that wesswere of the same height, and I perceived that we were evensssingularly alike in general contour of person and outline ofssfeature. I was galled, too, by the rumor touching a relationship,sswhich had grown current in the upper forms. In a word, nothingsscould more seriously disturb me, (although I scrupulouslyssconcealed such disturbance,) than any allusion to a similarity ofssmind, person, or condition existing between us. But, in truth, Isshad no reason to believe that (with the exception of the matterssof relationship, and in the case of Wilson himself,) thissssimilarity had ever been made a subject of comment, or evenssobserved at all by our schoolfellows. That he observed it in allssits bearings, and as fixedly as I, was apparent; but that hesscould discover in such circumstances so fruitful a field ofssannoyance, can only be attributed, as I said before, to his moressthan ordinary penetration.ssHis cue, which was to perfect an imitation of myself, lay both insswords and in actions; and most admirably did he play his part. Myssdress it was an easy matter to copy; my gait and general mannersswere, without difficulty, appropriated; in spite of hisssconstitutional defect, even my voice did not escape him. Mysslouder tones were, of course, unattempted, but then the key—itsswas identical; _and his singular whisper, it grew the very echossof my own_.ssHow greatly this most exquisite portraiture harassed me, (for itsscould not justly be termed a caricature,) I will not now venturessto describe. I had but one consolation—in the fact that thessimitation, apparently, was noticed by myself alone, and that Isshad to endure only the knowing and strangely sarcastic smiles ofssmy namesake himself. Satisfied with having produced in my bosomssthe intended effect, he seemed to chuckle in secret over thesssting he had inflicted, and was characteristically disregardfulssof the public applause which the success of his witty endeavoursssmight have so easily elicited. That the school, indeed, did notssfeel his design, perceive its accomplishment, and participate insshis sneer, was, for many anxious months, a riddle I could notssresolve. Perhaps the gradation of his copy rendered it not sossreadily perceptible; or, more possibly, I owed my security to thessmaster air of the copyist, who, disdaining the letter, (which inssa painting is all the obtuse can see,) gave but the full spiritssof his original for my individual contemplation and chagrin.ssI have already more than once spoken of the disgusting air ofsspatronage which he assumed toward me, and of his frequentssofficious interference with my will. This interference often tookssthe ungracious character of advice; advice not openly given, butsshinted or insinuated. I received it with a repugnance whichssgained strength as I grew in years. Yet, at this distant day, letssme do him the simple justice to acknowledge that I can recall nossoccasion when the suggestions of my rival were on the side ofssthose errors or follies so usual to his immature age and seemingssinexperience; that his moral sense, at least, if not his generalsstalents and worldly wisdom, was far keener than my own; and thatssI might, to-day, have been a better, and thus a happier man, hadssI less frequently rejected the counsels embodied in those meaningsswhispers which I then but too cordially hated and too bitterlyssdespised.ssAs it was, I at length grew restive in the extreme under hisssdistasteful supervision, and daily resented more and more openlysswhat I considered his intolerable arrogance. I have said that, inssthe first years of our connexion as schoolmates, my feelings inssregard to him might have been easily ripened into friendship;ssbut, in the latter months of my residence at the academy,ssalthough the intrusion of his ordinary manner had, beyond doubt,ssin some measure, abated, my sentiments, in nearly similarssproportion, partook very much of positive hatred. Upon onessoccasion he saw this, I think, and afterwards avoided, or made assshow of avoiding me.ssIt was about the same period, if I remember aright, that, in anssaltercation of violence with him, in which he was more thanssusually thrown off his guard, and spoke and acted with anssopenness of demeanor rather foreign to his nature, I discovered,ssor fancied I discovered, in his accent, his air, and generalssappearance, a something which first startled, and then deeplyssinterested me, by bringing to mind dim visions of my earliestssinfancy—wild, confused and thronging memories of a time whenssmemory herself was yet unborn. I cannot better describe thesssensation which oppressed me than by saying that I could withssdifficulty shake off the belief of my having been acquainted withssthe being who stood before me, at some epoch very long ago—somesspoint of the past even infinitely remote. The delusion, however,ssfaded rapidly as it came; and I mention it at all but to definessthe day of the last conversation I there held with my singularssnamesake.ssThe huge old house, with its countless subdivisions, had severalsslarge chambers communicating with each other, where slept thessgreater number of the students. There were, however, (as mustssnecessarily happen in a building so awkwardly planned,) manysslittle nooks or recesses, the odds and ends of the structure; andssthese the economic ingenuity of Dr. Bransby had also fitted up asssdormitories; although, being the merest closets, they weresscapable of accommodating but a single individual. One of thesesssmall apartments was occupied by Wilson.ssOne night, about the close of my fifth year at the school, andssimmediately after the altercation just mentioned, finding everyssone wrapped in sleep, I arose from bed, and, lamp in hand, stolessthrough a wilderness of narrow passages from my own bedroom tossthat of my rival. I had long been plotting one of thosessill-natured pieces of practical wit at his expense in which I hadsshitherto been so uniformly unsuccessful. It was my intention,ssnow, to put my scheme in operation, and I resolved to make himssfeel the whole extent of the malice with which I was imbued.ssHaving reached his closet, I noiselessly entered, leaving thesslamp, with a shade over it, on the outside. I advanced a step,ssand listened to the sound of his tranquil breathing. Assured ofsshis being asleep, I returned, took the light, and with it againssapproached the bed. Close curtains were around it, which, in thessprosecution of my plan, I slowly and quietly withdrew, when thessbright rays fell vividly upon the sleeper, and my eyes, at thesssame moment, upon his countenance. I looked;—and a numbness, anssiciness of feeling instantly pervaded my frame. My breast heaved,ssmy knees tottered, my whole spirit became possessed with anssobjectless yet intolerable horror. Gasping for breath, I loweredssthe lamp in still nearer proximity to the face. Were these—thesessthe lineaments of William Wilson? I saw, indeed, that they weresshis, but I shook as if with a fit of the ague in fancying theysswere not. What was there about them to confound me in thisssmanner? I gazed;—while my brain reeled with a multitude ofssincoherent thoughts. Not thus he appeared—assuredly not thus—inssthe vivacity of his waking hours. The same name! the same contourssof person! the same day of arrival at the academy! And then hisssdogged and meaningless imitation of my gait, my voice, my habits,ssand my manner! Was it, in truth, within the bounds of humansspossibility, that what I now saw was the result, merely, of thesshabitual practice of this sarcastic imitation? Awe-stricken, andsswith a creeping shudder, I extinguished the lamp, passed silentlyssfrom the chamber, and left, at once, the halls of that oldssacademy, never to enter them again.ssAfter a lapse of some months, spent at home in mere idleness, Issfound myself a student at Eton. The brief interval had beensssufficient to enfeeble my remembrance of the events at Dr.ssBransby’s, or at least to effect a material change in the naturessof the feelings with which I remembered them. The truth—thesstragedy—of the drama was no more. I could now find room to doubtssthe evidence of my senses; and seldom called up the subject atssall but with wonder at extent of human credulity, and a smile atssthe vivid force of the imagination which I hereditarilysspossessed. Neither was this species of scepticism likely to bessdiminished by the character of the life I led at Eton. The vortexssof thoughtless folly into which I there so immediately and sossrecklessly plunged, washed away all but the froth of my pastsshours, engulfed at once every solid or serious impression, andssleft to memory only the veriest levities of a former existence.ssI do not wish, however, to trace the course of my miserablessprofligacy here—a profligacy which set at defiance the laws,sswhile it eluded the vigilance of the institution. Three years ofssfolly, passed without profit, had but given me rooted habits ofssvice, and added, in a somewhat unusual degree, to my bodilyssstature, when, after a week of soulless dissipation, I invited asssmall party of the most dissolute students to a secret carousalssin my chambers. We met at a late hour of the night; for ourssdebaucheries were to be faithfully protracted until morning. Thesswine flowed freely, and there were not wanting other and perhapsssmore dangerous seductions; so that the gray dawn had alreadyssfaintly appeared in the east, while our delirious extravagancesswas at its height. Madly flushed with cards and intoxication, Isswas in the act of insisting upon a toast of more than wontedssprofanity, when my attention was suddenly diverted by thessviolent, although partial unclosing of the door of the apartment,ssand by the eager voice of a servant from without. He said thatsssome person, apparently in great haste, demanded to speak with messin the hall.ssWildly excited with wine, the unexpected interruption ratherssdelighted than surprised me. I staggered forward at once, and assfew steps brought me to the vestibule of the building. In thissslow and small room there hung no lamp; and now no light at allsswas admitted, save that of the exceedingly feeble dawn which madessits way through the semi-circular window. As I put my foot overssthe threshold, I became aware of the figure of a youth about myssown height, and habited in a white kerseymere morning frock, cutssin the novel fashion of the one I myself wore at the moment. Thisssthe faint light enabled me to perceive; but the features of hisssface I could not distinguish. Upon my entering he strodesshurriedly up to me, and, seizing me by the arm with a gesture ofsspetulant impatience, whispered the words “William Wilson!” in myssear.ssI grew perfectly sober in an instant.ssThere was that in the manner of the stranger, and in thesstremulous shake of his uplifted finger, as he held it between mysseyes and the light, which filled me with unqualified amazement;ssbut it was not this which had so violently moved me. It was thesspregnancy of solemn admonition in the singular, low, hissingssutterance; and, above all, it was the character, the tone, thesskey, of those few, simple, and familiar, yet whispered syllables,sswhich came with a thousand thronging memories of bygone days, andssstruck upon my soul with the shock of a galvanic battery. Ere Isscould recover the use of my senses he was gone.ssAlthough this event failed not of a vivid effect upon myssdisordered imagination, yet was it evanescent as vivid. For somessweeks, indeed, I busied myself in earnest inquiry, or was wrappedssin a cloud of morbid speculation. I did not pretend to disguisessfrom my perception the identity of the singular individual whossthus perseveringly interfered with my affairs, and harassed messwith his insinuated counsel. But who and what was thisssWilson?—and whence came he?—and what were his purposes? Uponssneither of these points could I be satisfied; merelyssascertaining, in regard to him, that a sudden accident in hisssfamily had caused his removal from Dr. Bransby’s academy on thessafternoon of the day in which I myself had eloped. But in a briefssperiod I ceased to think upon the subject; my attention being allssabsorbed in a contemplated departure for Oxford. Thither I soonsswent; the uncalculating vanity of my parents furnishing me withssan outfit and annual establishment, which would enable me tossindulge at will in the luxury already so dear to my heart,—to viessin profuseness of expenditure with the haughtiest heirs of thesswealthiest earldoms in Great Britain.ssExcited by such appliances to vice, my constitutional temperamentssbroke forth with redoubled ardor, and I spurned even the commonssrestraints of decency in the mad infatuation of my revels. But itsswere absurd to pause in the detail of my extravagance. Let itsssuffice, that among spendthrifts I out-Heroded Herod, and that,ssgiving name to a multitude of novel follies, I added no briefssappendix to the long catalogue of vices then usual in the mostssdissolute university of Europe.ssIt could hardly be credited, however, that I had, even here, sossutterly fallen from the gentlemanly estate, as to seekssacquaintance with the vilest arts of the gambler by profession,ssand, having become an adept in his despicable science, tosspractise it habitually as a means of increasing my alreadyssenormous income at the expense of the weak-minded among myssfellow-collegians. Such, nevertheless, was the fact. And the veryssenormity of this offence against all manly and honourablesssentiment proved, beyond doubt, the main if not the sole reasonssof the impunity with which it was committed. Who, indeed, amongssmy most abandoned associates, would not rather have disputed thessclearest evidence of his senses, than have suspected of suchsscourses, the gay, the frank, the generous William Wilson—thessnoblest and most liberal commoner at Oxford—him whose folliesss(said his parasites) were but the follies of youth and unbridledssfancy—whose errors but inimitable whim—whose darkest vice but asscareless and dashing extravagance?ssI had been now two years successfully busied in this way, whenssthere came to the university a young parvenu nobleman,ssGlendinning—rich, said report, as Herodes Atticus—his riches,sstoo, as easily acquired. I soon found him of weak intellect, and,ssof course, marked him as a fitting subject for my skill. Issfrequently engaged him in play, and contrived, with the gambler’sssusual art, to let him win considerable sums, the more effectuallyssto entangle him in my snares. At length, my schemes being ripe, Issmet him (with the full intention that this meeting should bessfinal and decisive) at the chambers of a fellow-commoner, (Mr.ssPreston,) equally intimate with both, but who, to do him justice,ssentertained not even a remote suspicion of my design. To give tossthis a better coloring, I had contrived to have assembled a partyssof some eight or ten, and was solicitously careful that thessintroduction of cards should appear accidental, and originate inssthe proposal of my contemplated dupe himself. To be brief upon assvile topic, none of the low finesse was omitted, so customaryssupon similar occasions that it is a just matter for wonder howssany are still found so besotted as to fall its victim.ssWe had protracted our sitting far into the night, and I had atsslength effected the manoeuvre of getting Glendinning as my solessantagonist. The game, too, was my favorite _écarté!_ The rest ofssthe company, interested in the extent of our play, had abandonedsstheir own cards, and were standing around us as spectators. Thess_parvenu_, who had been induced by my artifices in the early partssof the evening, to drink deeply, now shuffled, dealt, or played,sswith a wild nervousness of manner for which his intoxication, Issthought, might partially, but could not altogether account. In assvery short period he had become my debtor to a large amount,sswhen, having taken a long draught of port, he did precisely whatssI had been coolly anticipating—he proposed to double our alreadyssextravagant stakes. With a well-feigned show of reluctance, andssnot until after my repeated refusal had seduced him into somessangry words which gave a color of pique to my compliance, did Issfinally comply. The result, of course, did but prove how entirelyssthe prey was in my toils: in less than an hour he had quadrupledsshis debt. For some time his countenance had been losing thessflorid tinge lent it by the wine; but now, to my astonishment, Issperceived that it had grown to a pallor truly fearful. I say tossmy astonishment. Glendinning had been represented to my eagerssinquiries as immeasurably wealthy; and the sums which he had asssyet lost, although in themselves vast, could not, I supposed,ssvery seriously annoy, much less so violently affect him. That hesswas overcome by the wine just swallowed, was the idea which mostssreadily presented itself; and, rather with a view to thesspreservation of my own character in the eyes of my associates,ssthan from any less interested motive, I was about to insist,ssperemptorily, upon a discontinuance of the play, when somessexpressions at my elbow from among the company, and anssejaculation evincing utter despair on the part of Glendinning,ssgave me to understand that I had effected his total ruin undersscircumstances which, rendering him an object for the pity of all,ssshould have protected him from the ill offices even of a fiend.ssWhat now might have been my conduct it is difficult to say. Thesspitiable condition of my dupe had thrown an air of embarrassedssgloom over all; and, for some moments, a profound silence wasssmaintained, during which I could not help feeling my cheekssstingle with the many burning glances of scorn or reproach castssupon me by the less abandoned of the party. I will even own thatssan intolerable weight of anxiety was for a brief instant liftedssfrom my bosom by the sudden and extraordinary interruption whichssensued. The wide, heavy folding doors of the apartment were allssat once thrown open, to their full extent, with a vigorous andssrushing impetuosity that extinguished, as if by magic, everysscandle in the room. Their light, in dying, enabled us just tossperceive that a stranger had entered, about my own height, andssclosely muffled in a cloak. The darkness, however, was now total;ssand we could only feel that he was standing in our midst. Beforessany one of us could recover from the extreme astonishment intosswhich this rudeness had thrown all, we heard the voice of thessintruder.ss“Gentlemen,” he said, in a low, distinct, andssnever-to-be-forgotten whisper which thrilled to the very marrowssof my bones, “Gentlemen, I make no apology for this behaviour,ssbecause in thus behaving, I am but fulfilling a duty. You are,ssbeyond doubt, uninformed of the true character of the person whosshas to-night won at _écarté_ a large sum of money from LordssGlendinning. I will therefore put you upon an expeditious andssdecisive plan of obtaining this very necessary information.ssPlease to examine, at your leisure, the inner linings of the cuffssof his left sleeve, and the several little packages which may bessfound in the somewhat capacious pockets of his embroideredssmorning wrapper.”ssWhile he spoke, so profound was the stillness that one might havessheard a pin drop upon the floor. In ceasing, he departed at once,ssand as abruptly as he had entered. Can I—shall I describe mysssensations? Must I say that I felt all the horrors of the damned?ssMost assuredly I had little time given for reflection. Many handsssroughly seized me upon the spot, and lights were immediatelyssreprocured. A search ensued. In the lining of my sleeve weressfound all the court cards essential in _écarté_, and, in thesspockets of my wrapper, a number of packs, facsimiles of thosessused at our sittings, with the single exception that mine were ofssthe species called, technically, arrondees; the honours beingssslightly convex at the ends, the lower cards slightly convex atssthe sides. In this disposition, the dupe who cuts, as customary,ssat the length of the pack, will invariably find that he cuts hisssantagonist an honor; while the gambler, cutting at the breadth,sswill, as certainly, cut nothing for his victim which may count inssthe records of the game.ssAny burst of indignation upon this discovery would have affectedssme less than the silent contempt, or the sarcastic composure,sswith which it was received.ss“Mr. Wilson,” said our host, stooping to remove from beneath hisssfeet an exceedingly luxurious cloak of rare furs, “Mr. Wilson,ssthis is your property.” (The weather was cold; and, upon quittingssmy own room, I had thrown a cloak over my dressing wrapper,ssputting it off upon reaching the scene of play.) “I presume it issssupererogatory to seek here (eyeing the folds of the garment withssa bitter smile) for any farther evidence of your skill. Indeed,sswe have had enough. You will see the necessity, I hope, ofssquitting Oxford—at all events, of quitting instantly mysschambers.”ssAbased, humbled to the dust as I then was, it is probable that Issshould have resented this galling language by immediate personalssviolence, had not my whole attention been at the moment arrestedssby a fact of the most startling character. The cloak which I hadssworn was of a rare description of fur; how rare, howssextravagantly costly, I shall not venture to say. Its fashion,sstoo, was of my own fantastic invention; for I was fastidious tossan absurd degree of coxcombry, in matters of this frivolousssnature. When, therefore, Mr. Preston reached me that which he hadsspicked up upon the floor, and near the folding doors of thessapartment, it was with an astonishment nearly bordering uponssterror, that I perceived my own already hanging on my arm, (wheressI had no doubt unwittingly placed it,) and that the one presentedssme was but its exact counterpart in every, in even the minutestsspossible particular. The singular being who had so disastrouslyssexposed me, had been muffled, I remembered, in a cloak; and nonesshad been worn at all by any of the members of our party with thessexception of myself. Retaining some presence of mind, I took thessone offered me by Preston; placed it, unnoticed, over my own;ssleft the apartment with a resolute scowl of defiance; and, nextssmorning ere dawn of day, commenced a hurried journey from Oxfordssto the continent, in a perfect agony of horror and of shame.ssI fled in vain. My evil destiny pursued me as if in exultation,ssand proved, indeed, that the exercise of its mysterious dominionsshad as yet only begun. Scarcely had I set foot in Paris ere I hadssfresh evidence of the detestable interest taken by this Wilson inssmy concerns. Years flew, while I experienced no relief.ssVillain!—at Rome, with how untimely, yet with how spectral anssofficiousness, stepped he in between me and my ambition! AtssVienna, too—at Berlin—and at Moscow! Where, in truth, had I notssbitter cause to curse him within my heart? From his inscrutablesstyranny did I at length flee, panic-stricken, as from asspestilence; and to the very ends of the earth I fled in vain.ssAnd again, and again, in secret communion with my own spirit,sswould I demand the questions “Who is he?—whence came he?—and whatssare his objects?” But no answer was there found. And then Issscrutinized, with a minute scrutiny, the forms, and the methods,ssand the leading traits of his impertinent supervision. But evensshere there was very little upon which to base a conjecture. Itsswas noticeable, indeed, that, in no one of the multipliedssinstances in which he had of late crossed my path, had he sosscrossed it except to frustrate those schemes, or to disturb thosessactions, which, if fully carried out, might have resulted inssbitter mischief. Poor justification this, in truth, for anssauthority so imperiously assumed! Poor indemnity for naturalssrights of self-agency so pertinaciously, so insultingly denied!ssI had also been forced to notice that my tormentor, for a verysslong period of time, (while scrupulously and with miraculousssdexterity maintaining his whim of an identity of apparel withssmyself,) had so contrived it, in the execution of his variedssinterference with my will, that I saw not, at any moment, thessfeatures of his face. Be Wilson what he might, this, at least,sswas but the veriest of affectation, or of folly. Could he, for anssinstant, have supposed that, in my admonisher at Eton—in thessdestroyer of my honor at Oxford,—in him who thwarted my ambitionssat Rome, my revenge at Paris, my passionate love at Naples, orsswhat he falsely termed my avarice in Egypt,—that in this, myssarch-enemy and evil genius, could fail to recognise the WilliamssWilson of my school boy days,—the namesake, the companion, thessrival,—the hated and dreaded rival at Dr. Bransby’s?ssImpossible!—But let me hasten to the last eventful scene of thessdrama.ssThus far I had succumbed supinely to this imperious domination.ssThe sentiment of deep awe with which I habitually regarded thesselevated character, the majestic wisdom, the apparentssomnipresence and omnipotence of Wilson, added to a feeling ofsseven terror, with which certain other traits in his nature andssassumptions inspired me, had operated, hitherto, to impress messwith an idea of my own utter weakness and helplessness, and tosssuggest an implicit, although bitterly reluctant submission tosshis arbitrary will. But, of late days, I had given myself upssentirely to wine; and its maddening influence upon my hereditarysstemper rendered me more and more impatient of control. I began tossmurmur,—to hesitate,—to resist. And was it only fancy whichssinduced me to believe that, with the increase of my own firmness,ssthat of my tormentor underwent a proportional diminution? Be thisssas it may, I now began to feel the inspiration of a burning hope,ssand at length nurtured in my secret thoughts a stern andssdesperate resolution that I would submit no longer to bessenslaved.ssIt was at Rome, during the Carnival of 18—, that I attended assmasquerade in the palazzo of the Neapolitan Duke Di Broglio. Isshad indulged more freely than usual in the excesses of thesswine-table; and now the suffocating atmosphere of the crowdedssrooms irritated me beyond endurance. The difficulty, too, ofssforcing my way through the mazes of the company contributed not asslittle to the ruffling of my temper; for I was anxiously seeking,ss(let me not say with what unworthy motive) the young, the gay,ssthe beautiful wife of the aged and doting Di Broglio. With a toossunscrupulous confidence she had previously communicated to me thesssecret of the costume in which she would be habited, and now,sshaving caught a glimpse of her person, I was hurrying to make myssway into her presence. At this moment I felt a light hand placedssupon my shoulder, and that ever-remembered, low, damnabless_whisper_ within my ear.ssIn an absolute phrenzy of wrath, I turned at once upon him whosshad thus interrupted me, and seized him violently by the collar.ssHe was attired, as I had expected, in a costume altogethersssimilar to my own; wearing a Spanish cloak of blue velvet, begirtssabout the waist with a crimson belt sustaining a rapier. A maskssof black silk entirely covered his face.ss“Scoundrel!” I said, in a voice husky with rage, while everysssyllable I uttered seemed as new fuel to my fury, “scoundrel!ssimpostor! accursed villain! you shall not—you shall not dog messunto death! Follow me, or I stab you where you stand!”—and Issbroke my way from the ball-room into a small ante-chamberssadjoining, dragging him unresistingly with me as I went.ssUpon entering, I thrust him furiously from me. He staggeredssagainst the wall, while I closed the door with an oath, andsscommanded him to draw. He hesitated but for an instant; then,sswith a slight sigh, drew in silence, and put himself upon hisssdefence.ssThe contest was brief indeed. I was frantic with every species ofsswild excitement, and felt within my single arm the energy andsspower of a multitude. In a few seconds I forced him by sheerssstrength against the wainscoting, and thus, getting him at mercy,ssplunged my sword, with brute ferocity, repeatedly through andssthrough his bosom.ssAt that instant some person tried the latch of the door. Isshastened to prevent an intrusion, and then immediately returnedssto my dying antagonist. But what human language can adequatelyssportray that astonishment, that horror which possessed me at thessspectacle then presented to view? The brief moment in which Issaverted my eyes had been sufficient to produce, apparently, assmaterial change in the arrangements at the upper or farther endssof the room. A large mirror,—so at first it seemed to me in myssconfusion—now stood where none had been perceptible before; and,ssas I stepped up to it in extremity of terror, mine own image, butsswith features all pale and dabbled in blood, advanced to meet messwith a feeble and tottering gait.ssThus it appeared, I say, but was not. It was my antagonist—it wasssWilson, who then stood before me in the agonies of hisssdissolution. His mask and cloak lay, where he had thrown them,ssupon the floor. Not a thread in all his raiment—not a line in allssthe marked and singular lineaments of his face which was not,sseven in the most absolute identity, mine own!ssIt was Wilson; but he spoke no longer in a whisper, and I couldsshave fancied that I myself was speaking while he said:ss_“You have conquered, and I yield. Yet, henceforward art thoussalso dead—dead to the World, to Heaven and to Hope! In me didstssthou exist—and, in my death, see by this image, which is thinessown, how utterly thou hast murdered thyself.”_ssTHE TELL-TALE HEART.ssTrue!—nervous—very, very dreadfully nervous I had been and am;ssbut why will you say that I am mad? The disease had sharpened mysssenses—not destroyed—not dulled them. Above all was the sense ofsshearing acute. I heard all things in the heaven and in the earth.ssI heard many things in hell. How, then, am I mad? Hearken! andssobserve how healthily—how calmly I can tell you the whole story.ssIt is impossible to say how first the idea entered my brain; butssonce conceived, it haunted me day and night. Object there wasssnone. Passion there was none. I loved the old man. He had neversswronged me. He had never given me insult. For his gold I had nossdesire. I think it was his eye! yes, it was this! He had the eyessof a vulture—a pale blue eye, with a film over it. Whenever itssfell upon me, my blood ran cold; and so by degrees—veryssgradually—I made up my mind to take the life of the old man, andssthus rid myself of the eye forever.ssNow this is the point. You fancy me mad. Madmen know nothing. Butssyou should have seen me. You should have seen how wisely Issproceeded—with what caution—with what foresight—with whatssdissimulation I went to work! I was never kinder to the old manssthan during the whole week before I killed him. And every night,ssabout midnight, I turned the latch of his door and opened it—oh,ssso gently! And then, when I had made an opening sufficient for mysshead, I put in a dark lantern, all closed, closed, that no lightssshone out, and then I thrust in my head. Oh, you would havesslaughed to see how cunningly I thrust it in! I moved itssslowly—very, very slowly, so that I might not disturb the oldssman’s sleep. It took me an hour to place my whole head within thessopening so far that I could see him as he lay upon his bed.ssHa!—would a madman have been so wise as this? And then, when mysshead was well in the room, I undid the lantern cautiously—oh, sosscautiously—cautiously (for the hinges creaked)—I undid it just sossmuch that a single thin ray fell upon the vulture eye. And this Issdid for seven long nights—every night just at midnight—but Issfound the eye always closed; and so it was impossible to do thesswork; for it was not the old man who vexed me, but his Evil Eye.ssAnd every morning, when the day broke, I went boldly into thesschamber, and spoke courageously to him, calling him by name in asshearty tone, and inquiring how he has passed the night. So yousssee he would have been a very profound old man, indeed, tosssuspect that every night, just at twelve, I looked in upon himsswhile he slept.ssUpon the eighth night I was more than usually cautious in openingssthe door. A watch’s minute hand moves more quickly than did mine.ssNever before that night had I felt the extent of my own powers—ofssmy sagacity. I could scarcely contain my feelings of triumph. Tossthink that there I was, opening the door, little by little, andsshe not even to dream of my secret deeds or thoughts. I fairlysschuckled at the idea; and perhaps he heard me; for he moved onssthe bed suddenly, as if startled. Now you may think that I drewssback—but no. His room was as black as pitch with the thickssdarkness, (for the shutters were close fastened, through fear ofssrobbers,) and so I knew that he could not see the opening of thessdoor, and I kept pushing it on steadily, steadily.ssI had my head in, and was about to open the lantern, when myssthumb slipped upon the tin fastening, and the old man sprang upssin bed, crying out—“Who’s there?”ssI kept quite still and said nothing. For a whole hour I did notssmove a muscle, and in the meantime I did not hear him lie down.ssHe was still sitting up in the bed listening;—just as I havessdone, night after night, hearkening to the death watches in thesswall.ssPresently I heard a slight groan, and I knew it was the groan ofssmortal terror. It was not a groan of pain or of grief—oh, no!—itsswas the low stifled sound that arises from the bottom of the soulsswhen overcharged with awe. I knew the sound well. Many a night,ssjust at midnight, when all the world slept, it has welled up fromssmy own bosom, deepening, with its dreadful echo, the terrors thatssdistracted me. I say I knew it well. I knew what the old manssfelt, and pitied him, although I chuckled at heart. I knew thatsshe had been lying awake ever since the first slight noise, whensshe had turned in the bed. His fears had been ever since growingssupon him. He had been trying to fancy them causeless, but couldssnot. He had been saying to himself—“It is nothing but the wind inssthe chimney—it is only a mouse crossing the floor,” or “It isssmerely a cricket which has made a single chirp.” Yes, he had beensstrying to comfort himself with these suppositions: but he hadssfound all in vain. All in vain; because Death, in approaching himsshad stalked with his black shadow before him, and enveloped thessvictim. And it was the mournful influence of the unperceivedssshadow that caused him to feel—although he neither saw norssheard—to feel the presence of my head within the room.ssWhen I had waited a long time, very patiently, without hearingsshim lie down, I resolved to open a little—a very, very littlesscrevice in the lantern. So I opened it—you cannot imagine howssstealthily, stealthily—until, at length a simple dim ray, likessthe thread of the spider, shot from out the crevice and fell fullssupon the vulture eye.ssIt was open—wide, wide open—and I grew furious as I gazed uponssit. I saw it with perfect distinctness—all a dull blue, with asshideous veil over it that chilled the very marrow in my bones;ssbut I could see nothing else of the old man’s face or person: forssI had directed the ray as if by instinct, precisely upon thessdamned spot.ssAnd have I not told you that what you mistake for madness is butssover-acuteness of the sense?—now, I say, there came to my ears asslow, dull, quick sound, such as a watch makes when enveloped insscotton. I knew that sound well, too. It was the beating of thessold man’s heart. It increased my fury, as the beating of a drumssstimulates the soldier into courage.ssBut even yet I refrained and kept still. I scarcely breathed. Issheld the lantern motionless. I tried how steadily I couldssmaintain the ray upon the eye. Meantime the hellish tattoo of thessheart increased. It grew quicker and quicker, and louder andsslouder every instant. The old man’s terror must have beenssextreme! It grew louder, I say, louder every moment!—do you markssme well? I have told you that I am nervous: so I am. And now atssthe dead hour of the night, amid the dreadful silence of that oldsshouse, so strange a noise as this excited me to uncontrollablessterror. Yet, for some minutes longer I refrained and stood still.ssBut the beating grew louder, louder! I thought the heart mustssburst. And now a new anxiety seized me—the sound would be heardssby a neighbour! The old man’s hour had come! With a loud yell, Issthrew open the lantern and leaped into the room. He shriekedssonce—once only. In an instant I dragged him to the floor, andsspulled the heavy bed over him. I then smiled gaily, to find thessdeed so far done. But, for many minutes, the heart beat on with assmuffled sound. This, however, did not vex me; it would not bessheard through the wall. At length it ceased. The old man wasssdead. I removed the bed and examined the corpse. Yes, he wasssstone, stone dead. I placed my hand upon the heart and held itssthere many minutes. There was no pulsation. He was stone dead.ssHis eye would trouble me no more.ssIf still you think me mad, you will think so no longer when Issdescribe the wise precautions I took for the concealment of thessbody. The night waned, and I worked hastily, but in silence.ssFirst of all I dismembered the corpse. I cut off the head and thessarms and the legs.ssI then took up three planks from the flooring of the chamber, andssdeposited all between the scantlings. I then replaced the boardsssso cleverly, so cunningly, that no human eye—not even his—couldsshave detected any thing wrong. There was nothing to wash out—nossstain of any kind—no blood-spot whatever. I had been too wary forssthat. A tub had caught all—ha! ha!ssWhen I had made an end of these labors, it was four o’clock—stillssdark as midnight. As the bell sounded the hour, there came assknocking at the street door. I went down to open it with a lightssheart,—for what had I now to fear? There entered three men, whossintroduced themselves, with perfect suavity, as officers of thesspolice. A shriek had been heard by a neighbour during the night;sssuspicion of foul play had been aroused; information had beensslodged at the police office, and they (the officers) had beenssdeputed to search the premises.ssI smiled,—for what had I to fear? I bade the gentlemen welcome.ssThe shriek, I said, was my own in a dream. The old man, Issmentioned, was absent in the country. I took my visitors all overssthe house. I bade them search—search well. I led them, at length,ssto his chamber. I showed them his treasures, secure, undisturbed.ssIn the enthusiasm of my confidence, I brought chairs into thessroom, and desired them here to rest from their fatigues, while Issmyself, in the wild audacity of my perfect triumph, placed my ownssseat upon the very spot beneath which reposed the corpse of thessvictim.ssThe officers were satisfied. My manner had convinced them. I wassssingularly at ease. They sat, and while I answered cheerily, theysschatted of familiar things. But, ere long, I felt myself gettingsspale and wished them gone. My head ached, and I fancied a ringingssin my ears: but still they sat and still chatted. The ringingssbecame more distinct:—it continued and became more distinct: Isstalked more freely to get rid of the feeling: but it continuedssand gained definiteness—until, at length, I found that the noisesswas not within my ears.ssNo doubt I now grew _very_ pale;—but I talked more fluently, andsswith a heightened voice. Yet the sound increased—and what could Issdo? It was a low, dull, quick sound—much such a sound as a watchssmakes when enveloped in cotton. I gasped for breath—and yet thessofficers heard it not. I talked more quickly—more vehemently; butssthe noise steadily increased. I arose and argued about trifles,ssin a high key and with violent gesticulations; but the noisesssteadily increased. Why would they not be gone? I paced the floorssto and fro with heavy strides, as if excited to fury by thessobservations of the men—but the noise steadily increased. Oh God!sswhat could I do? I foamed—I raved—I swore! I swung the chair uponsswhich I had been sitting, and grated it upon the boards, but thessnoise arose over all and continually increased. It grewsslouder—louder—louder! And still the men chatted pleasantly, andsssmiled. Was it possible they heard not? Almighty God!—no, no!ssThey heard!—they suspected!—they knew!—they were making a mockeryssof my horror!—this I thought, and this I think. But anything wasssbetter than this agony! Anything was more tolerable than thisssderision! I could bear those hypocritical smiles no longer! Issfelt that I must scream or die! and now—again!—hark! louder!sslouder! louder! _louder!_ss“Villains!” I shrieked, “dissemble no more! I admit thessdeed!—tear up the planks!—here, here!—It is the beating of hissshideous heart!”ssBERENICEssDicebant mihi sodales, si sepulchrum amicae visitarem, curas measssaliquar tulum fore levatas.—_Ebn Zaiat_.ssMisery is manifold. The wretchedness of earth is multiform.ssOverreaching the wide horizon as the rainbow, its hues are asssvarious as the hues of that arch—as distinct too, yet asssintimately blended. Overreaching the wide horizon as the rainbow!ssHow is it that from beauty I have derived a type ofssunloveliness?—from the covenant of peace, a simile of sorrow? Butssas, in ethics, evil is a consequence of good, so, in fact, out ofssjoy is sorrow born. Either the memory of past bliss is thessanguish of to-day, or the agonies which _are_, have their originssin the ecstasies which _might have been_.ssMy baptismal name is Egaeus; that of my family I will notssmention. Yet there are no towers in the land more time-honoredssthan my gloomy, gray, hereditary halls. Our line has been calledssa race of visionaries; and in many striking particulars—in thesscharacter of the family mansion—in the frescos of the chiefsssaloon—in the tapestries of the dormitories—in the chiselling ofsssome buttresses in the armory—but more especially in the galleryssof antique paintings—in the fashion of the library chamber—and,sslastly, in the very peculiar nature of the library’ssscontents—there is more than sufficient evidence to warrant thessbelief.ssThe recollections of my earliest years are connected with thatsschamber, and with its volumes—of which latter I will say no more.ssHere died my mother. Herein was I born. But it is mere idlenessssto say that I had not lived before—that the soul has no previousssexistence. You deny it?—let us not argue the matter. Convincedssmyself, I seek not to convince. There is, however, a remembrancessof aerial forms—of spiritual and meaning eyes—of sounds, musicalssyet sad—a remembrance which will not be excluded; a memory like assshadow—vague, variable, indefinite, unsteady; and like a shadow,sstoo, in the impossibility of my getting rid of it while thesssunlight of my reason shall exist.ssIn that chamber was I born. Thus awaking from the long night ofsswhat seemed, but was not, nonentity, at once into the veryssregions of fairy land—into a palace of imagination—into the wildssdominions of monastic thought and erudition—it is not singularssthat I gazed around me with a startled and ardent eye—that Issloitered away my boyhood in books, and dissipated my youth inssreverie; but it _is_ singular that as years rolled away, and thessnoon of manhood found me still in the mansion of my fathers—itss_is_ wonderful what stagnation there fell upon the springs of mysslife—wonderful how total an inversion took place in the characterssof my commonest thought. The realities of the world affected messas visions, and as visions only, while the wild ideas of the landssof dreams became, in turn, not the material of my every-dayssexistence, but in very deed that existence utterly and solely inssitself.ssBerenice and I were cousins, and we grew up together in mysspaternal halls. Yet differently we grew—I, ill of health, andssburied in gloom—she, agile, graceful, and overflowing withssenergy; hers, the ramble on the hill-side—mine the studies of thesscloister; I, living within my own heart, and addicted, body andsssoul, to the most intense and painful meditation—she, roamingsscarelessly through life, with no thought of the shadows in hersspath, or the silent flight of the raven-winged hours. Berenice!—Isscall upon her name—Berenice!—and from the gray ruins of memory assthousand tumultuous recollections are startled at the sound! Ah,ssvividly is her image before me now, as in the early days of hersslight-heartedness and joy! Oh, gorgeous yet fantastic beauty! Oh,sssylph amid the shrubberies of Arnheim! Oh, Naiad among itsssfountains! And then—then all is mystery and terror, and a talesswhich should not be told. Disease—a fatal disease, fell like thesssimoon upon her frame; and, even while I gazed upon her, thessspirit of change swept over her, pervading her mind, her habits,ssand her character, and, in a manner the most subtle and terrible,ssdisturbing even the identity of her person! Alas! the destroyersscame and went!—and the victim—where is she? I knew her not—orssknew her no longer as Berenice.ssAmong the numerous train of maladies superinduced by that fatalssand primary one which effected a revolution of so horrible a kindssin the moral and physical being of my cousin, may be mentioned asssthe most distressing and obstinate in its nature, a species ofssepilepsy not unfrequently terminating in _trance_ itself—trancessvery nearly resembling positive dissolution, and from which herssmanner of recovery was in most instances, startlingly abrupt. Inssthe mean time my own disease—for I have been told that I shouldsscall it by no other appellation—my own disease, then, grewssrapidly upon me, and assumed finally a monomaniac character of assnovel and extraordinary form—hourly and momently gainingssvigor—and at length obtaining over me the most incomprehensiblessascendancy. This monomania, if I must so term it, consisted in assmorbid irritability of those properties of the mind inssmetaphysical science termed the _attentive_. It is more thanssprobable that I am not understood; but I fear, indeed, that it isssin no manner possible to convey to the mind of the merely generalssreader, an adequate idea of that nervous _intensity of interest_sswith which, in my case, the powers of meditation (not to speaksstechnically) busied and buried themselves, in the contemplationssof even the most ordinary objects of the universe.ssTo muse for long unwearied hours, with my attention riveted tosssome frivolous device on the margin, or in the typography of assbook; to become absorbed, for the better part of a summer’s day,ssin a quaint shadow falling aslant upon the tapestry or upon thessfloor; to lose myself, for an entire night, in watching thesssteady flame of a lamp, or the embers of a fire; to dream awaysswhole days over the perfume of a flower; to repeat, monotonously,sssome common word, until the sound, by dint of frequentssrepetition, ceased to convey any idea whatever to the mind; tosslose all sense of motion or physical existence, by means ofssabsolute bodily quiescence long and obstinately persevered in:sssuch were a few of the most common and least pernicious vagariesssinduced by a condition of the mental faculties, not, indeed,ssaltogether unparalleled, but certainly bidding defiance tossanything like analysis or explanation.ssYet let me not be misapprehended. The undue, earnest, and morbidssattention thus excited by objects in their own nature frivolous,ssmust not be confounded in character with that ruminatingsspropensity common to all mankind, and more especially indulged inssby persons of ardent imagination. It was not even, as might be atssfirst supposed, an extreme condition, or exaggeration of suchsspropensity, but primarily and essentially distinct and different.ssIn the one instance, the dreamer, or enthusiast, being interestedssby an object usually _not_ frivolous, imperceptibly loses sightssof this object in a wilderness of deductions and suggestionsssissuing therefrom, until, at the conclusion of a day-dream _oftenssreplete with luxury_, he finds the _incitamentum_, or first causessof his musings, entirely vanished and forgotten. In my case, thessprimary object was _invariably frivolous_, although assuming,ssthrough the medium of my distempered vision, a refracted andssunreal importance. Few deductions, if any, were made; and thosessfew pertinaciously returning in upon the original object as asscentre. The meditations were _never_ pleasurable; and, at thesstermination of the reverie, the first cause, so far from beingssout of sight, had attained that supernaturally exaggeratedssinterest which was the prevailing feature of the disease. In assword, the powers of mind more particularly exercised were, withssme, as I have said before, the _attentive_, and are, with thessday-dreamer, the _speculative_.ssMy books, at this epoch, if they did not actually serve tossirritate the disorder, partook, it will be perceived, largely, insstheir imaginative and inconsequential nature, of thesscharacteristic qualities of the disorder itself. I well remember,ssamong others, the treatise of the noble Italian, Coelius SecundusssCurio, “_De Amplitudine Beati Regni Dei;_” St. Austin’s greatsswork, the “City of God;” and Tertullian’s “_De Carne Christi_,”ssin which the paradoxical sentence “_Mortuus est Dei filius;sscredible est quia ineptum est: et sepultus resurrexit; certum estssquia impossibile est,_” occupied my undivided time, for manyssweeks of laborious and fruitless investigation.ssThus it will appear that, shaken from its balance only by trivialssthings, my reason bore resemblance to that ocean-crag spoken ofssby Ptolemy Hephestion, which steadily resisting the attacks ofsshuman violence, and the fiercer fury of the waters and the winds,sstrembled only to the touch of the flower called Asphodel. Andssalthough, to a careless thinker, it might appear a matter beyondssdoubt, that the alteration produced by her unhappy malady, in thess_moral_ condition of Berenice, would afford me many objects forssthe exercise of that intense and abnormal meditation whose naturessI have been at some trouble in explaining, yet such was not inssany degree the case. In the lucid intervals of my infirmity, hersscalamity, indeed, gave me pain, and, taking deeply to heart thatsstotal wreck of her fair and gentle life, I did not fail tossponder, frequently and bitterly, upon the wonder-working means bysswhich so strange a revolution had been so suddenly brought tosspass. But these reflections partook not of the idiosyncrasy of myssdisease, and were such as would have occurred, under similarsscircumstances, to the ordinary mass of mankind. True to its ownsscharacter, my disorder revelled in the less important but moressstartling changes wrought in the _physical_ frame of Berenice—inssthe singular and most appalling distortion of her personalssidentity.ssDuring the brightest days of her unparalleled beauty, most surelyssI had never loved her. In the strange anomaly of my existence,ssfeelings with me, _had never been_ of the heart, and my passionsss_always were_ of the mind. Through the gray of the earlyssmorning—among the trellised shadows of the forest at noonday—andssin the silence of my library at night—she had flitted by my eyes,ssand I had seen her—not as the living and breathing Berenice, butssas the Berenice of a dream; not as a being of the earth, earthy,ssbut as the abstraction of such a being; not as a thing to admire,ssbut to analyze; not as an object of love, but as the theme of thessmost abstruse although desultory speculation. And _now_—now Issshuddered in her presence, and grew pale at her approach; yet,ssbitterly lamenting her fallen and desolate condition, I called tossmind that she had loved me long, and, in an evil moment, I spokessto her of marriage.ssAnd at length the period of our nuptials was approaching, when,ssupon an afternoon in the winter of the year—one of thosessunseasonably warm, calm, and misty days which are the nurse ofssthe beautiful Halcyon (*1),—I sat, (and sat, as I thought,ssalone,) in the inner apartment of the library. But, uplifting mysseyes, I saw that Berenice stood before me.ssWas it my own excited imagination—or the misty influence of thessatmosphere—or the uncertain twilight of the chamber—or the grayssdraperies which fell around her figure—that caused in it sossvacillating and indistinct an outline? I could not tell. Shessspoke no word; and I—not for worlds could I have uttered asssyllable. An icy chill ran through my frame; a sense ofssinsufferable anxiety oppressed me; a consuming curiosity pervadedssmy soul; and sinking back upon the chair, I remained for somesstime breathless and motionless, with my eyes riveted upon herssperson. Alas! its emaciation was excessive, and not one vestigessof the former being lurked in any single line of the contour. Myssburning glances at length fell upon the face.ssThe forehead was high, and very pale, and singularly placid; andssthe once jetty hair fell partially over it, and overshadowed thesshollow temples with innumerable ringlets, now of a vivid yellow,ssand jarring discordantly, in their fantastic character, with thessreigning melancholy of the countenance. The eyes were lifeless,ssand lustreless, and seemingly pupilless, and I shrankssinvoluntarily from their glassy stare to the contemplation of thessthin and shrunken lips. They parted; and in a smile of peculiarssmeaning, _the teeth_ of the changed Berenice disclosed themselvesssslowly to my view. Would to God that I had never beheld them, orssthat, having done so, I had died!ssThe shutting of a door disturbed me, and, looking up, I foundssthat my cousin had departed from the chamber. But from thessdisordered chamber of my brain, had not, alas! departed, andsswould not be driven away, the white and ghastly _spectrum_ of thessteeth. Not a speck on their surface—not a shade on theirssenamel—not an indenture in their edges—but what that period ofssher smile had sufficed to brand in upon my memory. I saw themss_now_ even more unequivocally than I beheld them _then_. Thessteeth!—the teeth!—they were here, and there, and everywhere, andssvisibly and palpably before me; long, narrow, and excessivelysswhite, with the pale lips writhing about them, as in the veryssmoment of their first terrible development. Then came the fullssfury of my _monomania_, and I struggled in vain against itsssstrange and irresistible influence. In the multiplied objects ofssthe external world I had no thoughts but for the teeth. For thesessI longed with a phrenzied desire. All other matters and allssdifferent interests became absorbed in their singlesscontemplation. They—they alone were present to the mental eye,ssand they, in their sole individuality, became the essence of myssmental life. I held them in every light. I turned them in everyssattitude. I surveyed their characteristics. I dwelt upon theirsspeculiarities. I pondered upon their conformation. I mused uponssthe alteration in their nature. I shuddered as I assigned to themssin imagination a sensitive and sentient power, and even whenssunassisted by the lips, a capability of moral expression. OfssMademoiselle Salle it has been well said, “_Que tous ses passsetaient des sentiments_,” and of Berenice I more seriouslyssbelieved _que toutes ses dents etaient des idées_. _Desssidées!_—ah here was the idiotic thought that destroyed me! _Desssidées!_—ah, _therefore_ it was that I coveted them so madly! Issfelt that their possession could alone ever restore me to peace,ssin giving me back to reason.ssAnd the evening closed in upon me thus—and then the darknesssscame, and tarried, and went—and the day again dawned—and thessmists of a second night were now gathering around—and still I satssmotionless in that solitary room—and still I sat buried inssmeditation—and still the _phantasma_ of the teeth maintained itsssterrible ascendancy, as, with the most vivid hideousssdistinctness, it floated about amid the changing lights andssshadows of the chamber. At length there broke in upon my dreams asscry as of horror and dismay; and thereunto, after a pause,sssucceeded the sound of troubled voices, intermingled with manysslow moanings of sorrow or of pain. I arose from my seat, andssthrowing open one of the doors of the library, saw standing outssin the ante-chamber a servant maiden, all in tears, who told messthat Berenice was—no more! She had been seized with epilepsy inssthe early morning, and now, at the closing in of the night, thessgrave was ready for its tenant, and all the preparations for thessburial were completed.ssI found myself sitting in the library, and again sitting theressalone. It seemed that I had newly awakened from a confused andssexciting dream. I knew that it was now midnight, and I was wellssaware, that since the setting of the sun, Berenice had beenssinterred. But of that dreary period which intervened I had nosspositive, at least no definite comprehension. Yet its memory wasssreplete with horror—horror more horrible from being vague, andssterror more terrible from ambiguity. It was a fearful page in thessrecord my existence, written all over with dim, and hideous, andssunintelligible recollections. I strived to decypher them, but inssvain; while ever and anon, like the spirit of a departed sound,ssthe shrill and piercing shriek of a female voice seemed to bessringing in my ears. I had done a deed—what was it? I asked myselfssthe question aloud, and the whispering echoes of the chamberssanswered me,—“_What was it?_”ssOn the table beside me burned a lamp, and near it lay a littlessbox. It was of no remarkable character, and I had seen itssfrequently before, for it was the property of the familyssphysician; but how came it _there_, upon my table, and why did Issshudder in regarding it? These things were in no manner to bessaccounted for, and my eyes at length dropped to the open pages ofssa book, and to a sentence underscored therein. The words were thesssingular but simple ones of the poet Ebn Zaiat:—“_Dicebant mihisssodales si sepulchrum amicae visitarem, curas meas aliquantulumssfore levatas_.” Why then, as I perused them, did the hairs of mysshead erect themselves on end, and the blood of my body becomesscongealed within my veins?ssThere came a light tap at the library door—and, pale as thesstenant of a tomb, a menial entered upon tiptoe. His looks weresswild with terror, and he spoke to me in a voice tremulous, husky,ssand very low. What said he?—some broken sentences I heard. Hesstold of a wild cry disturbing the silence of the night—of thessgathering together of the household—of a search in the directionssof the sound; and then his tones grew thrillingly distinct as hesswhispered me of a violated grave—of a disfigured body enshrouded,ssyet still breathing—still palpitating—_still alive_!ssHe pointed to garments;—they were muddy and clotted with gore. Issspoke not, and he took me gently by the hand: it was indentedsswith the impress of human nails. He directed my attention to somessobject against the wall. I looked at it for some minutes: it wasssa spade. With a shriek I bounded to the table, and grasped thessbox that lay upon it. But I could not force it open; and in mysstremor, it slipped from my hands, and fell heavily, and burstssinto pieces; and from it, with a rattling sound, there rolled outsssome instruments of dental surgery, intermingled with thirty-twosssmall, white and ivory-looking substances that were scattered tossand fro about the floor.ssELEONORAssSub conservatione formæ specificæ salva anima.ss—_Raymond Lully_.ssI am come of a race noted for vigor of fancy and ardor ofsspassion. Men have called me mad; but the question is not yetsssettled, whether madness is or is not the loftiestssintelligence—whether much that is glorious—whether all that isssprofound—does not spring from disease of thought—from moods ofssmind exalted at the expense of the general intellect. They whossdream by day are cognizant of many things which escape those whossdream only by night. In their gray visions they obtain glimpsesssof eternity, and thrill, in awakening, to find that they havessbeen upon the verge of the great secret. In snatches, they learnsssomething of the wisdom which is of good, and more of the meressknowledge which is of evil. They penetrate, however, rudderlessssor compassless into the vast ocean of the “light ineffable,” andssagain, like the adventures of the Nubian geographer, “agressisssunt mare tenebrarum, quid in eo esset exploraturi.”ssWe will say, then, that I am mad. I grant, at least, that theressare two distinct conditions of my mental existence—the conditionssof a lucid reason, not to be disputed, and belonging to thessmemory of events forming the first epoch of my life—and asscondition of shadow and doubt, appertaining to the present, andssto the recollection of what constitutes the second great era ofssmy being. Therefore, what I shall tell of the earlier period,ssbelieve; and to what I may relate of the later time, give onlysssuch credit as may seem due, or doubt it altogether, or, if doubtssit ye cannot, then play unto its riddle the Oedipus.ssShe whom I loved in youth, and of whom I now pen calmly andssdistinctly these remembrances, was the sole daughter of the onlysssister of my mother long departed. Eleonora was the name of mysscousin. We had always dwelled together, beneath a tropical sun,ssin the Valley of the Many-Colored Grass. No unguided footstepssever came upon that vale; for it lay away up among a range ofssgiant hills that hung beetling around about it, shutting out thesssunlight from its sweetest recesses. No path was trodden in itsssvicinity; and, to reach our happy home, there was need of puttingssback, with force, the foliage of many thousands of forest trees,ssand of crushing to death the glories of many millions of fragrantssflowers. Thus it was that we lived all alone, knowing nothing ofssthe world without the valley—I, and my cousin, and her mother.ssFrom the dim regions beyond the mountains at the upper end of ourssencircled domain, there crept out a narrow and deep river,ssbrighter than all save the eyes of Eleonora; and, windingssstealthily about in mazy courses, it passed away, at length,ssthrough a shadowy gorge, among hills still dimmer than thosesswhence it had issued. We called it the “River of Silence”; forssthere seemed to be a hushing influence in its flow. No murmurssarose from its bed, and so gently it wandered along, that thesspearly pebbles upon which we loved to gaze, far down within itsssbosom, stirred not at all, but lay in a motionless content, eachssin its own old station, shining on gloriously forever.ssThe margin of the river, and of the many dazzling rivulets thatssglided through devious ways into its channel, as well as thessspaces that extended from the margins away down into the depthsssof the streams until they reached the bed of pebbles at thessbottom,—these spots, not less than the whole surface of thessvalley, from the river to the mountains that girdled it in, weresscarpeted all by a soft green grass, thick, short, perfectly even,ssand vanilla-perfumed, but so besprinkled throughout with thessyellow buttercup, the white daisy, the purple violet, and thessruby-red asphodel, that its exceeding beauty spoke to our heartsssin loud tones, of the love and of the glory of God.ssAnd, here and there, in groves about this grass, likesswildernesses of dreams, sprang up fantastic trees, whose tallssslender stems stood not upright, but slanted gracefully towardssthe light that peered at noon-day into the centre of the valley.ssTheir mark was speckled with the vivid alternate splendor ofssebony and silver, and was smoother than all save the cheeks ofssEleonora; so that, but for the brilliant green of the huge leavesssthat spread from their summits in long, tremulous lines, dallyingsswith the Zephyrs, one might have fancied them giant serpents ofssSyria doing homage to their sovereign the Sun.ssHand in hand about this valley, for fifteen years, roamed I withssEleonora before Love entered within our hearts. It was onessevening at the close of the third lustrum of her life, and of thessfourth of my own, that we sat, locked in each other’s embrace,ssbeneath the serpent-like trees, and looked down within the waterssof the River of Silence at our images therein. We spoke no wordsssduring the rest of that sweet day, and our words even upon thessmorrow were tremulous and few. We had drawn the God Eros fromssthat wave, and now we felt that he had enkindled within us thessfiery souls of our forefathers. The passions which had forsscenturies distinguished our race, came thronging with the fanciesssfor which they had been equally noted, and together breathed assdelirious bliss over the Valley of the Many-Colored Grass. Asschange fell upon all things. Strange, brilliant flowers,ssstar-shaped, burn out upon the trees where no flowers had beenssknown before. The tints of the green carpet deepened; and when,ssone by one, the white daisies shrank away, there sprang up inssplace of them, ten by ten of the ruby-red asphodel. And lifessarose in our paths; for the tall flamingo, hitherto unseen, withssall gay glowing birds, flaunted his scarlet plumage before us.ssThe golden and silver fish haunted the river, out of the bosom ofsswhich issued, little by little, a murmur that swelled, at length,ssinto a lulling melody more divine than that of the harp ofssÆolus—sweeter than all save the voice of Eleonora. And now, too,ssa voluminous cloud, which we had long watched in the regions ofssHesper, floated out thence, all gorgeous in crimson and gold, andsssettling in peace above us, sank, day by day, lower and lower,ssuntil its edges rested upon the tops of the mountains, turningssall their dimness into magnificence, and shutting us up, as ifssforever, within a magic prison-house of grandeur and of glory.ssThe loveliness of Eleonora was that of the Seraphim; but she wasssa maiden artless and innocent as the brief life she had led amongssthe flowers. No guile disguised the fervor of love which animatedssher heart, and she examined with me its inmost recesses as wesswalked together in the Valley of the Many-Colored Grass, andssdiscoursed of the mighty changes which had lately taken placesstherein.ssAt length, having spoken one day, in tears, of the last sadsschange which must befall Humanity, she thenceforward dwelt onlyssupon this one sorrowful theme, interweaving it into all ourssconverse, as, in the songs of the bard of Schiraz, the samessimages are found occurring, again and again, in every impressivessvariation of phrase.ssShe had seen that the finger of Death was upon her bosom—that,sslike the ephemeron, she had been made perfect in loveliness onlyssto die; but the terrors of the grave to her lay solely in assconsideration which she revealed to me, one evening at twilight,ssby the banks of the River of Silence. She grieved to think that,sshaving entombed her in the Valley of the Many-Colored Grass, Isswould quit forever its happy recesses, transferring the lovesswhich now was so passionately her own to some maiden of the outerssand everyday world. And, then and there, I threw myself hurriedlyssat the feet of Eleonora, and offered up a vow, to herself and tossHeaven, that I would never bind myself in marriage to anyssdaughter of Earth—that I would in no manner prove recreant to herssdear memory, or to the memory of the devout affection with whichssshe had blessed me. And I called the Mighty Ruler of the Universessto witness the pious solemnity of my vow. And the curse which Issinvoked of Him and of her, a saint in Helusion should I provesstraitorous to that promise, involved a penalty the exceedingssgreat horror of which will not permit me to make record of itsshere. And the bright eyes of Eleonora grew brighter at my words;ssand she sighed as if a deadly burthen had been taken from herssbreast; and she trembled and very bitterly wept; but she madessacceptance of the vow, (for what was she but a child?) and itssmade easy to her the bed of her death. And she said to me, notssmany days afterward, tranquilly dying, that, because of what Isshad done for the comfort of her spirit she would watch over me inssthat spirit when departed, and, if so it were permitted herssreturn to me visibly in the watches of the night; but, if thisssthing were, indeed, beyond the power of the souls in Paradise,ssthat she would, at least, give me frequent indications of hersspresence, sighing upon me in the evening winds, or filling thessair which I breathed with perfume from the censers of the angels.ssAnd, with these words upon her lips, she yielded up her innocentsslife, putting an end to the first epoch of my own.ssThus far I have faithfully said. But as I pass the barrier inssTime’s path, formed by the death of my beloved, and proceed withssthe second era of my existence, I feel that a shadow gathers overssmy brain, and I mistrust the perfect sanity of the record. Butsslet me on.—Years dragged themselves along heavily, and still Issdwelled within the Valley of the Many-Colored Grass; but a secondsschange had come upon all things. The star-shaped flowers shrankssinto the stems of the trees, and appeared no more. The tints ofssthe green carpet faded; and, one by one, the ruby-red asphodelssswithered away; and there sprang up, in place of them, ten by ten,ssdark, eye-like violets, that writhed uneasily and were everssencumbered with dew. And Life departed from our paths; for thesstall flamingo flaunted no longer his scarlet plumage before us,ssbut flew sadly from the vale into the hills, with all the gayssglowing birds that had arrived in his company. And the golden andsssilver fish swam down through the gorge at the lower end of ourssdomain and bedecked the sweet river never again. And the lullingssmelody that had been softer than the wind-harp of Æolus, and moressdivine than all save the voice of Eleonora, it died little bysslittle away, in murmurs growing lower and lower, until the streamssreturned, at length, utterly, into the solemnity of its originalsssilence. And then, lastly, the voluminous cloud uprose, and,ssabandoning the tops of the mountains to the dimness of old, fellssback into the regions of Hesper, and took away all its manifoldssgolden and gorgeous glories from the Valley of the Many-ColoredssGrass.ssYet the promises of Eleonora were not forgotten; for I heard thesssounds of the swinging of the censers of the angels; and streamsssof a holy perfume floated ever and ever about the valley; and atsslone hours, when my heart beat heavily, the winds that bathed myssbrow came unto me laden with soft sighs; and indistinct murmursssfilled often the night air, and once—oh, but once only! I wasssawakened from a slumber, like the slumber of death, by thesspressing of spiritual lips upon my own.ssBut the void within my heart refused, even thus, to be filled. Isslonged for the love which had before filled it to overflowing. Atsslength the valley pained me through its memories of Eleonora, andssI left it for ever for the vanities and the turbulent triumphs ofssthe world.ssI found myself within a strange city, where all things might havessserved to blot from recollection the sweet dreams I had dreamedssso long in the Valley of the Many-Colored Grass. The pomps andsspageantries of a stately court, and the mad clangor of arms, andssthe radiant loveliness of women, bewildered and intoxicated myssbrain. But as yet my soul had proved true to its vows, and thessindications of the presence of Eleonora were still given me inssthe silent hours of the night. Suddenly these manifestations theyssceased, and the world grew dark before mine eyes, and I stoodssaghast at the burning thoughts which possessed, at the terriblesstemptations which beset me; for there came from some far, farssdistant and unknown land, into the gay court of the king Issserved, a maiden to whose beauty my whole recreant heart yieldedssat once—at whose footstool I bowed down without a struggle, inssthe most ardent, in the most abject worship of love. What,ssindeed, was my passion for the young girl of the valley insscomparison with the fervor, and the delirium, and thessspirit-lifting ecstasy of adoration with which I poured out mysswhole soul in tears at the feet of the ethereal Ermengarde?—Oh,ssbright was the seraph Ermengarde! and in that knowledge I hadssroom for none other. Oh, divine was the angel Ermengarde! and asssI looked down into the depths of her memorial eyes, I thoughtssonly of them—and of her.ssI wedded—nor dreaded the curse I had invoked; and its bitternesssswas not visited upon me. And once—but once again in the silencessof the night; there came through my lattice the soft sighs whichsshad forsaken me; and they modelled themselves into familiar andsssweet voice, saying:ss“Sleep in peace! for the Spirit of Love reigneth and ruleth, and,ssin taking to thy passionate heart her who is Ermengarde, thou artssabsolved, for reasons which shall be made known to thee inssHeaven, of thy vows unto Eleonora.”